BETTER NEVER TO HAVE BEEN

This page intentionally left blank

BETTER NEVER
TO HAVE BEEN
The Harm of Coming into Existence

DAVID BENATAR

CLARENDON PRESS · OXFORD

1
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With offices in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
 David Benatar 2006
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 2006
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Data available
Typeset by Laserwords Private Limited, Chennai, India
Printed in Great Britain
on acid-free paper by
Biddles Ltd., King’s Lynn, Norfolk
ISBN 0–19–929642–1

978–0–19–929642–2

1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

To my parents,
even though they brought me into existence;
and to my brothers,
each of whose existence, although a harm to him,
is a great benefit to the rest of us.

This page intentionally left blank

Preface
Each one of us was harmed by being brought into existence. That
harm is not negligible, because the quality of even the best lives is
very bad—and considerably worse than most people recognize it
to be. Although it is obviously too late to prevent our own existence, it is not too late to prevent the existence of future possible
people. Creating new people is thus morally problematic. In this
book I argue for these claims and show why the usual responses to
them—incredulity, if not indignation—are defective.
Given the deep resistance to the views I shall be defending, I have
no expectation that this book or its arguments will have any impact
on baby-making. Procreation will continue undeterred, causing a
vast amount of harm. I have written this book, then, not under
the illusion that it will make (much) difference to the number of
people there will be but rather from the opinion that what I have
to say needs to be said whether or not it is accepted.
Many readers will be inclined to dismiss my arguments and
will do so too hastily. When rejecting an unpopular view, it is
extraordinarily easy to be overly confident in the force of one’s
responses. This is partly because there is less felt need to justify
one’s views when one is defending an orthodoxy. It is also partly
because counter-responses from those critical of this orthodoxy,
given their rarity, are harder to anticipate.
The argument I advance in this book has been enhanced as a
result of a number of engaging critical responses to earlier versions. Anonymous reviewers for the American Philosophical Quarterly
offered worthy challenges, forcing me to improve the earliest versions. The two papers I published in that journal provided the basis
for Chapter  of this book and I am grateful for permission to use
that earlier material. Those papers were considerably reworked

and developed partly as a result of many comments received in the
intervening years and especially while I was writing this book. I am
grateful to the University of Cape Town for a sabbatical semester
in , during which four of the book’s chapters were written.
I presented material from various chapters in a number of fora,
including the Philosophy Department at the University of Cape
Town, Rhodes University in Grahamstown, South Africa, the Seventh World Congress of Bioethics in Sydney, Australia, and in the
United States at the Jean Beer Blumenfeld Center for Ethics at Georgia State University, the Center for Bioethics at the University of
Minnesota, and the Philosophy Department at the University of
Alabama at Birmingham. I am grateful for the lively discussion
on these occasions. For their helpful comments and suggestions, I
should like to thank, among others, Andy Altman, Dan Brock, Bengt
Brülde, Nick Fotion, Stephen Nathanson, Marty Perlmutter, Robert
Segall, David Weberman, Bernhard Weiss, and Kit Wellman.
I am most grateful to the two reviewers for Oxford University
Press, David Wasserman and David Boonin. They gave extensive
comments that helped me anticipate the kinds of responses critical
readers of the published work could have. I have attempted to raise
and reply to these in revising the manuscript. I am sure that the
book is much better for having considered their objections, even
if they are not convinced by my replies. I am acutely aware, however, that there is always room for improvement and I only wish
that I knew now, rather than later (or never), what improvements
could be made.
Finally, I should like to thank my parents and brothers for all
they do and for all they are. This book is dedicated to them.
DB
Cape Town
8 December 2005

 ∼ Preface

Contents
. Introduction



Who is so lucky?
Anti-natalism and the pro-natal bias
Outline of the book
A reader’s guide






. Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm



Can coming into existence ever be a harm?
Lives worth living and lives not worth living
Lives worth starting and lives worth continuing
Why coming into existence is always a harm
The asymmetry of pleasure and pain
Comparing existing with never existing
Other asymmetries
Against not regretting one’s existence
. How Bad Is Coming into Existence?
Why life’s quality is not the difference between its
good and its bad
Why self-assessments of one’s life’s quality are
unreliable
Three views about the quality of life, and why life
goes badly on all of them
Hedonistic theories
Desire-fulfilment theories
Objective list theories
Concluding comments about the three views
A world of suffering



















. Having Children: The Anti-Natal View
Procreation
No duty to procreate
Is there a duty not to procreate?
Procreative freedom
Understanding the purported right
Grounding the right on autonomy
Grounding the right on futility
Grounding the right on disagreement
Grounding the right on reasonable disagreement
Disability and wrongful life
The non-identity problem and the disability rights
objection distinguished
The ‘social construction of disability’ argument
The ‘expressivist’ argument
Responding to the disability rights arguments
Wrongful life
Assisted and artificial reproduction
Reproductive ethics and sexual ethics
The tragedy of birth and the morals of
gynaecology
Treating future people as mere means
. Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View
Four kinds of interests
Which interests are morally considerable?
When does consciousness begin?
Interests in continued existence
The Golden Rule
A ‘future like ours’
Conclusions

 ∼ Contents






























. Population and Extinction



Overpopulation
Solving problems in moral theory about population
Professor Parfit’s population problems
Why anti-natalism is compatible with Theory X
Contractarianism
Phased extinction
When decreasing population decreases quality
of life
Reducing population to zero
Extinction
Two means of extinction
Three concerns about extinction
. Conclusion








Countering the counter-intuitiveness objection
Responding to the optimist
Death and suicide
Religious views
Misanthropy and philanthropy
Bibliography
Index
















Contents ∼ 

This page intentionally left blank


Introduction
Life is so terrible, it would have been better not to have been
born. Who is so lucky? Not one in a hundred thousand!
Jewish saying

The central idea of this book is that coming into existence is always
a serious harm. That idea will be defended at length, but the basic
insight is quite simple: Although the good things in one’s life make
it go better than it otherwise would have gone, one could not have
been deprived by their absence if one had not existed. Those who
never exist cannot be deprived. However, by coming into existence
one does suffer quite serious harms that could not have befallen
one had one not come into existence.
To say that the basic insight is quite simple is not to say that
either it or what we can deduce from it will be undisputed. I
shall consider all the anticipated objections in due course, and
shall argue that they fail. The implication of all this is that
coming into existence, far from ever constituting a net benefit,
always constitutes a net harm. Most people, under the influence
of powerful biological dispositions towards optimism, find this
conclusion intolerable. They are still more indignant at the further
implication that we should not create new people.

Creating new people, by having babies, is so much a part of
human life that it is rarely thought even to require a justification.
Indeed, most people do not even think about whether they should
or should not make a baby. They just make one. In other words,
procreation is usually the consequence of sex rather than the result
of a decision to bring people into existence. Those who do indeed
decide to have a child might do so for any number of reasons, but
among these reasons cannot be the interests of the potential child.
One can never have a child for that child’s sake. That much should
be apparent to everybody, even those who reject the stronger view
for which I argue in this book—that not only does one not benefit
people by bringing them into existence, but one always harms them.
My argument applies not only to humans but also to all other
sentient beings. Such beings do not simply exist. They exist in a
way that there is something that it feels like to exist. In other words,
they are not merely objects but also subjects. Although sentience
is a later evolutionary development and is a more complex state of
being than insentience, it is far from clear that it is a better state
of being. This is because sentient existence comes at a significant
cost. In being able to experience, sentient beings are able to, and
do, experience unpleasantness.
Although I think that coming into existence harms all sentient
beings and I shall sometimes speak about all such beings, my focus
will be on humans. There are a few reasons for this focus, other
than the sheer convenience of it. The first is that people find the
conclusion hardest to accept when it applies to themselves. The
focus on humans, rather than on all sentient life, reinforces its
application to humans. A second reason is that, with one exception,
the argument has most practical significance when applied to
humans because we can act on it by desisting from producing
children. The exception is the case of human breeding of animals,¹
¹ I treat this as an exception because humans breed only a small proportion of
all species of sentient animals. Although this is an exceptional case, it has great

 ∼ Introduction

from which we could also desist. A third reason for focusing on
humans is that those humans who do not desist from producing
children cause suffering to those about whom they tend to care
most—their own children. This may make the issues more vivid
for them than they otherwise would be.

W H O I S S O LU CK Y ?
A version of the view I defend in this book is the subject of some
humour:
Life is so terrible, it would have been better not to have been born. Who
is so lucky? Not one in a hundred thousand!²

Sigmund Freud describes this quip as a ‘nonsensical joke’,³ which
raises the question whether my view is similarly nonsensical. Is it
significance, given the amount of harm inflicted on those animals that humans breed
for food and other commodities, and is thus worthy of brief discussion now. One
particularly poor argument in defence of eating meat is that if humans did not eat
animals, those animals would not have been brought into existence in the first place.
Humans would simply not have bred them in the numbers they do breed them.
The claim is that although these animals are killed, this cost to them is outweighed
by the benefit to them of having been brought into existence. This is an appalling
argument for many reasons (some of which are outlined by Robert Nozick. See his
Anarchy, State and Utopia (Oxford: Blackwell, ) –). First, the lives of many of
these animals are so bad that even if one rejected my argument one would still have
to think that they were harmed by being brought into existence. Secondly, those who
advance this argument fail to see that it could apply as readily to human babies that
are produced only to be eaten. Here we see quite clearly that being brought into
existence only to be killed for food is no benefit. It is only because killing animals
is thought to be acceptable that the argument is thought to have any force. In fact
it adds nothing to the (mistaken) view that killing animals for food is acceptable.
Finally, the argument that animals are benefited by being brought into existence
only to be killed ignores the argument that I shall develop in Chapters  and —that
coming into existence is itself, quite independently of how much the animal then
suffers, always a serious harm.
² In the philosophical literature this Jewish witticism has been cited by Robert
Nozick (Anarchy, State and Utopia,  n. ), and Bernard Williams (‘The Makropulos
Case: Reflections on the Tedium of Immortality’ in Problems of the Self (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, ) ).
³ Freud, Sigmund, The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of
Sigmund Freud, vii, trans. James Strachey (London: The Hogarth Press, ) .

Introduction ∼ 

sheer drivel to say that coming into existence is a harm and thus
that it is better never to come into existence? Many people think
that it is. Much of the argument in Chapter  will show that they
are mistaken. But first some ground must be cleared of confusion.
Dr Freud says that anybody ‘who is not born is not a mortal man
at all, and there is no good and no best for him’.⁴ Here Dr Freud
anticipates an aspect of what is called the ‘non-identity’ problem,
which I shall discuss at length in Chapter . Some contemporary
philosophers offer a similar objection when they deny that one
could be better off not being born. The never-existent cannot be
benefited and cannot be better off.
I shall not claim that the never-existent literally are better off.
Instead, I shall argue that coming into existence is always bad for
those who come into existence. In other words, although we may
not be able to say of the never-existent that never existing is good
for them, we can say of the existent that existence is bad for them.
There is no absurdity here, or so I shall argue.
Once we acknowledge that coming into existence can be a
harm, we might then want to speak loosely about never coming
into existence being ‘better’. This is not to say that it is better for
the never-existent, nor that the never-existent are benefited. I grant
that there is even something odd about speaking about the ‘neverexistent’, because that is surely a referentless term. There clearly
are not any never-existent people. It is, however, a convenient

⁴ Ibid. Although this is the deepest concern Dr Freud has with the quip, he
has others too. These, however, arise from his version of the quip, which sounds
particularly nonsensical. He says: ‘Never to be born would be the best thing for
mortal men.’ ‘But’, adds the philosophical comment in Fliegende Blätter, ‘this happens
to scarcely one person in a hundred thousand.’ (Ibid.) The embellishment that never
being born ‘happens to scarcely one in a hundred thousand’ does add to the joke’s
incongruity. Never being born happens to not one in a hundred thousand, and not to
scarcely one in a hundred thousand. (James Strachey describes the Fliegende Blätter as
a ‘well-known comic weekly’. I leave to others the minor, but interesting, historical
question whether the Fliegende Blätter drew on Jewish wit or whether it was the
source of this particular piece of Jewish humour, or whether both draw on some
other source.)

 ∼ Introduction

term, of which we can make some sense. By it we mean those
possible people who never become actual.
With this in mind, consider the joke again. It can be viewed as
making two claims: () that it is better not to be born, and () that
nobody is lucky enough not to be born. We now see that there is
a (loose) sense in which one can say that it is better not to be born.
It is an indirect way of saying that coming into existence is always
a harm. And there is nothing nonsensical in claiming that nobody
is lucky enough never to have come into existence, even though it
would have been (playful) nonsense to claim that there are some
people who are lucky enough not to come into existence.
In any event, the fact that one can construct a joke about the
view that coming into existence is always a harm, does not show
that that view itself is laughable nonsense. Although we can laugh
at silliness we can also laugh about very serious matters. It is into
the latter category that I place jokes about the harm of coming
into existence.⁵ Lest it be thought that the arguments I advance are
intended as mere philosophical games or jokes, I should emphasize
that I am entirely serious in my arguments and I believe the
conclusions.
I am serious about these matters because what lies in the balance
is the presence or absence of vast amounts of harm. I shall show in
Chapter  that each life contains a great deal of bad—much more
than people usually think. The only way to guarantee that some
future possible person will not suffer this harm is to ensure that
that possible person never becomes an actual person. Not only is
this harm all readily avoidable, but it is also so utterly pointless (at
least if we consider only the interests of the potential person and
not also the interests others might have in that person’s coming
⁵ There are other such jokes. For example, it has been joked that life is a sexually
transmitted terminal disease. (In cases of artificial reproduction, life is not sexually
transmitted, but it remains a terminal disease.) Others have jested that we are
born cold, naked, hungry, and wet—and that it is downhill from there. (Although
neonates cry not from a recognition of this, their cries, on my view, are ironically
appropriate.)

Introduction ∼ 

into existence). As I shall show in Chapter , the positive features
of life, although good for those who exist, cannot justify the negative features that accompany them. Their absence would not have
been a deprivation for one who never came into existence.
It is curious that while good people go to great lengths to spare
their children from suffering, few of them seem to notice that the
one (and only) guaranteed way to prevent all the suffering of their
children is not to bring those children into existence in the first
place.⁶ There are many reasons why people do not notice this, or
why, if they do notice it, that they do not act on the realization, but
the interests of the potential children cannot be among them, as I
shall argue.
Nor is the harm produced by the creation of a child usually
restricted to that child. The child soon finds itself motivated to
procreate, producing children who, in turn, develop the same
desire. Thus any pair of procreators can view themselves as
occupying the tip of a generational iceberg of suffering.⁷ They
experience the bad in their own lives. In the ordinary course of
events they will experience only some of the bad in their children’s
and possibly grandchildren’s lives (because these offspring usually
survive their progenitors), but beneath the surface of the current
generations lurk increasingly larger numbers of descendents and
their misfortunes. Assuming that each couple has three children,
an original pair’s cumulative descendents over ten generations
amount to , people. That constitutes a lot of pointless,
⁶ Rivka Weinberg makes a similar point when she says that ‘many of the parents
who are willing to make huge sacrifices for the sake of their desperately ill children
may never consider that the most important sacrifice they ought to make is not
to create these desperately ill children in the first place.’ (‘Procreative Justice: A
Contractualist Account’, Public Affairs Quarterly, / () .) Her point is more
restricted than mine because she applies it only to desperately ill children whereas I
would apply it to all children.
⁷ I owe the image of the iceberg to University of Cape Town geneticist Raj
Ramesar. He uses it to represent the relationship between carriers of a genetic
disorder and their (potential or actual) offspring. I have broadened the image to
apply not only to those with genetic disorders but to all those (members of sentient
species) with genes.

 ∼ Introduction

avoidable suffering. To be sure, full responsibility for it all does
not lie with the original couple because each new generation
faces the choice of whether to continue that line of descendents.
Nevertheless, they bear some responsibility for the generations
that ensue. If one does not desist from having children, one can
hardly expect one’s descendents to do so.
Although, as we have seen, nobody is lucky enough not to
be born, everybody is unlucky enough to have been born—and
particularly bad luck it is, as I shall now explain. On the quite
plausible assumption that one’s genetic origin is a necessary (but
not sufficient) condition for having come into existence,⁸ one
could not have been formed by anything other than the particular
gametes that produced the zygote from which one developed.
This implies, in turn, that one could not have had any genetic
parents other than those that one does have. It follows from
this that any person’s chances of having come into existence are
extremely remote. The existence of any one person is dependent
not only on that person’s parents themselves having come into
existence and having met⁹ but also on their having conceived that
person at the time that they did.¹⁰ Indeed, mere moments might
make a difference to which particular sperm is instrumental in
a conception. The recognition of how unlikely it was that one
would have come into existence, combined with the recognition
that coming into existence is always a serious harm, yields the
conclusion that one’s having come into existence is really bad luck.
It is bad enough when one suffers some harm. It is worse still when
the chances of having been harmed are very remote.
⁸ Derek Parfit calls this the ‘Origin View’. Reasons and Persons (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, ) .
⁹ Derek Parfit asks ‘how many of us could truly claim ‘‘Even if railways and
motor cars had never been invented, I would still have been born’’?’, Reasons and
Persons, .
¹⁰ Think of how many people are conceived because of a power failure, a
nocturnal noise waking their parents, or any other such opportunity merging
with urge.

Introduction ∼ 

Now there is something misleading about this observation.
This is because of all the trillions of possible people who could
have come into existence and assessed the odds, every one of
those who is in a position to assess the odds is unlucky whereas
there exists nobody whom the odds favoured. One hundred per
cent of assessors are unlucky, and nought per cent are lucky.
In other words, given procreation there was an excellent chance
that somebody would be harmed, and although the chances of any
person coming into existence are small, the chances of any existing
person having been harmed are one hundred per cent.

A N T I - NATA L I S M A N D T H E
P RO - NATA L B I A S
I shall argue that one implication of the view that coming into existence is always a serious harm is that we should not have children.
Some anti-natalist positions are founded on either a dislike of children¹¹ or on the interests of adults who have greater freedom and
resources if they do not have and rear children.¹² My anti-natalist
view is different. It arises, not from a dislike of children, but instead
from a concern to avoid the suffering of potential children and the
adults they would become, even if not having those children runs
counter to the interests of those who would have them.
Anti-natalist views, whatever their source, run up against an
extremely powerful pro-natalist bias. This bias has its roots in
the evolutionary origins of human (and more primitive animal)
psychology and biology. Those with pro-natal views are more
likely to pass on their genes. It is part of the pro-natal bias that most
¹¹ W.C. Fields said that he did not like children . . . unless they were very well
cooked. (Or was it that he only liked them fried?) See also Ogden Nash’s poems,
‘Did someone say ‘‘babies’’?’ and ‘To a small boy standing on my shoes while I am
wearing them’ in Family Reunion (London: J. M. Dent & Sons Ltd, ) –.
¹² Andrew Hacker refers to some of these arguments. See his review, ‘The Case
Against Kids’, The New York Review of Books, / () –.

 ∼ Introduction

people simply assume that passing on one’s genes is both good
and a sign of superiority. With different moral views, however,
survival, either of the self or of one’s genes, might not be seen as
an indication of being better.
The pro-natal bias manifests itself in many ways. For example,
there is the assumption that one should (get married or simply
cohabit in order to) produce children, and that, infertility aside,
one is either backward or selfish if one does not.¹³ The assumption
of ‘backwardness’ draws on an ontogenetic or individual developmental paradigm—children do not have children, but adults do.
Thus if one has not (yet) started breeding, one is not fully adult. But
it is far from clear that this is the appropriate paradigm. First, knowing when not to have a baby and having the self-control to follow
through with this is a sign of maturity not immaturity. There are
all too many (pubescent) children who are having children without
being adequately prepared to rear them. Second, is a related point:
from a phylogenetic perspective, the impulse to procreation is
extremely primitive. If ‘backward’ is understood as ‘primitive’ it
is procreation that is backward, and rationally motivated nonprocreation that is evolutionarily more recent and advanced.
Although non-procreation is sometimes, as I indicated above,
motivated by selfish concerns, it need not be. Where people refrain
from procreating in order to avoid inflicting the harm of coming
into existence, their motives are altruistic not selfish. Moreover,
any self-consciously altruistic motivation to have children is
thoroughly misguided where the intended beneficiaries are the
children, and, as I shall argue, inappropriate where they are other
people or the state.
In some communities there is considerable peer and other
social pressure to produce babies, and sometimes even as many
¹³ Sometimes the presumption is betrayed by the word ‘yet’ as in ‘Have you had
children yet?’ This assumption does not usually extend to (both male and female)
homosexuals who do not have children, although homosexuals, whether or not they
have children, are often the victims of a more vicious opprobrium. They are often
regarded as perverted or disgusting rather than backward or selfish.

Introduction ∼ 

babies as possible. This can occur even when parents are unable
to take adequate care of the large number of children they are
producing.¹⁴
Nor are the pressures always informal. Governments not
infrequently intervene, particularly, but not only, when birth rates
decline, in order to encourage baby-making. This is true even
where the baseline population is already high and the concern is
only about birth rates falling beneath that of replacement. Here
the concern is that there will be fewer people of working age
and thus fewer taxpayers to support a larger ageing population.¹⁵
For example, in Japan there were concerns that the birth rate of
. children would reduce the population of  million people
to  million in  and  million by .¹⁶ The Japanese
government took action. They launched the ‘Plus One Plan’,
aimed at persuading married couples to have one extra child,
and established the ‘Anti Low Birthrate Measures Promotion’
headquarters to coordinate the plan. One of the proposals in
the plan was a ¥. billion matchmaking budget to be spent
on ‘publicly-funded parties, boat cruises, and hiking trips for
single men and women’.¹⁷ The government also pledged financial
support for couples seeking expensive fertility treatment. The
‘Plus One Plan’ also had provision for diverting resources to
provide education loans to put children through school. Singapore
developed plans to persuade citizens to produce more children.
In addition to propaganda, it introduced financial incentives to
have a third child, paid maternity leave, and state-funded childcare
¹⁴ Beyer, Lisa, ‘Be Fruitful and Multiply: Criticism of the ultra-Orthodox fashion
for large families is coming from inside the community’, Time,  October , .
¹⁵ I shall say more in Chapter  about the costs to existing people of a decreased
birth rate. In the specific case of Japan, to which I shall now refer, not everybody
agrees that the population decline will impact very adversely on Japanese society.
See, for example, ‘The incredible shrinking country’, The Economist,  November
, –.
¹⁶ Watts, Jonathan, ‘Japan opens dating agency to improve birth rate’, The Lancet,
 () .
¹⁷ Ibid.

 ∼ Introduction

centres.¹⁸ And Australia has announced a $. billion ‘family
package’ to be distributed over five years. According to that
country’s treasurer, if ‘you can have children, it’s a good thing to
do’. In addition to having one child for the husband and one for the
wife, he urged Australians also to have one for their country.¹⁹
It is well known that totalitarian regimes often encourage
people, if not coerce or force them into baby-making for military
reasons—given the desire for new, plentiful generations of soldiers. Crudely put, this is pro-natalism for cannon fodder. Democracies, particularly those not involved in protracted conflict, are
not and need not be so crude, but this, as we have seen, does not
mean that they are devoid of pro-natalism.
Even where democracies take no formal steps to increase the
birth rate, we should note that democracy has an inherent bias
towards pro-natalism. Given that the majority prevails (even if
within certain liberal constraints), each sector of a democracy’s
population is incentivized to produce extra offspring in order for
its interests and agendas either to prevail or at least to hold their
own. Notice, by extension, that in a democracy those committed
to non-procreation could never, in the long run, prevail politically
against those committed to procreation.
Moreover, it is curious how democracy favours breeding over
immigration. Offspring have a presumed right to citizenship, while
potential immigrants do not. Imagine a polarized state consisting
of two opposing ethnic groups. One increases its size by breeding
and the other by immigration. Depending on who holds power,
the group that grows by immigration will either be prevented from
growing or it will be accused of colonialism.²⁰ But why should
democracy favour one indigenous group over another merely
because one breeds rather than increases by immigration? Why
¹⁸ Bowring, Philip, ‘For Love of Country’, Time,  September , .
¹⁹ Reuters, ‘Brace yerself Sheila, it’s your patriotic duty to breed’, Cape Times,
Thursday,  May , .
²⁰ The Arab–Jewish demographic within Israel is a case in point.

Introduction ∼ 

should breeding be unlimited but immigration curtailed where
political outcomes are equally sensitive to both ways of enhancing
population? Some may seek to answer this question by arguing
that a right to procreative freedom is more important than a right
to immigrate. That may indeed be an accurate description of the
way the law actually works, but we can question whether that
is the way it should be. Should somebody’s freedom to create a
person be more inviolable than somebody else’s freedom to have
a friend or family member immigrate?
Another way in which pro-natalism operates, even in the moral (and not merely the political) realm is that breeders enhance
their value by having children. Parents with dependents are somehow thought to count for more. If, for example, there is some
scarce resource—a donor kidney perhaps—and of the two potential recipients one is a parent of young children and one is not, the
parent, all things being equal, will likely be favoured. To let a parent
die is not only to thwart that person’s preference to be saved, but
also the preferences of his or her children that their parent be saved.
It is quite true, of course, that the death of the parent will harm
more people, but there is nonetheless something to be said against
favouring parents. Increasing one’s value by having children might
be like increasing one’s value by taking hostages. We might find it
unfair and decide not to reward it. That may make children’s lives
worse, but must the cost of preventing that outcome be placed on
the shoulders of those who do not have children?
None of the above is to deny that there are some societies in
which anti-natal policies have been adopted. The most obvious
example is China, where the government introduced a one-childper-couple policy. A few points are noteworthy, however. First,
such policies are exceptional. Secondly, they are a response to
massive (rather than merely moderate) overpopulation. Thirdly,
they are required precisely because they are a corrective to a very
powerful pro-natal bias, and thus do not constitute a refutation of
the existence of such bias.
 ∼ Introduction

Nor do I deny that there are some non-state critics of pronatalism. There are those, for example, who argue that one’s life is
better or at least no worse²¹ without children and there are those
who object to the discrimination against people who are either
infertile²² or ‘child-free’ by choice.²³ As welcome as this opposition
to pro-natalism is, most of it is inspired by concern for existing
people. Very rarely do we hear criticism of pro-natalism based on
what procreation does to those who are brought into existence.
There is one kind of exception: those who believe that the world
is too horrible a place into which to bring children. Such people
believe that there happens to be too much bad in the world to
make procreation acceptable. That belief must be right. I disagree
only in one way with those who advance it. Unlike (most of) them,
I think that there could be much less suffering and yet procreation
would remain unacceptable. On my view there is no net benefit
to coming into existence and thus coming into existence is never
worth its costs. I know that that view is hard to accept. I shall
defend it in some detail in Chapter . Sound though I believe my
argument to be, I cannot but hope that I am wrong.

OUTLINE OF THE BOOK
In the remainder of this introduction I shall provide an outline of
the rest of the book and offer some guidelines to readers.
The second and third chapters constitute the heart of the book.
In Chapter  I shall argue that coming into existence is always a
harm. To do this, I shall show first that coming into existence
²¹ Missner, Marshall, ‘Why Have Children?’, The International Journal of Applied
Philosophy, / () –.
²² May, Elaine Tyler, ‘Nonmothers as Bad Mothers: Infertility and the Maternal
Instinct’, in Ladd-Taylor, Molly, and Umansky, Lauri, ‘Bad’ Mothers: The Politics of
Blame in Twentieth-Century America (New York: NYU Press, ) –.
²³ Burkett, Elinor, The Baby Boon: How Family-Friendly America Cheats the Childless
(New York: The Free Press, ).

Introduction ∼ 

is sometimes a harm—a claim which ordinary people would
readily embrace but which must be defended against a famous
philosophical challenge. The argument that coming into existence
is always a harm can be summarized as follows: Both good and bad
things happen only to those who exist. However, there is a crucial
asymmetry between the good and the bad things. The absence of
bad things, such as pain, is good even if there is nobody to enjoy
that good, whereas the absence of good things, such as pleasure,
is bad only if there is somebody who is deprived of these good
things. The implication of this is that the avoidance of the bad by
never existing is a real advantage over existence, whereas the loss
of certain goods by not existing is not a real disadvantage over
never existing.
In the third chapter I argue that even the best lives are not
only much worse than people think but also very bad. To this
end, I shall argue first that life’s quality is not the difference
between its good and bad. Determining a life’s quality is a much
more complicated matter. I shall then discuss three views about
the quality of life—hedonistic views, desire-fulfilment views, and
objective list views—and show why life is bad irrespective of
which of these views one adopts. Finally, in this chapter, I shall
describe the world of suffering that we inhabit and argue that
this suffering is one of the costs of producing new people. The
arguments in the third chapter thus provide independent grounds
even for those who are not persuaded by the arguments in the
second chapter to accept the claim that coming into existence is
always a (serious) harm.
In the fourth chapter I shall argue that not only is there no duty
to procreate but there is a (moral) duty not to procreate. This
appears to conflict with a widely recognized right to procreative
freedom. I shall examine this right and its possible foundations,
arguing that it is best understood as a legal right and not a
moral one. Thus there is no necessary conflict with a moral
duty not to produce children. I then turn to the question of
 ∼ Introduction

disability and wrongful life. I shall consider various disability rights
arguments and show how my views, curiously, both lend support
to these arguments against their usual opponents, but in the end
undermine the views of both disability rights and their opponents.
Next I shall turn to the implications of my views for assisted and
artificial reproduction, before concluding with a discussion about
whether producing children treats them as mere means.
In the fifth chapter, I shall show how combining typical prochoice views about fetal moral status with my conclusions about
the harm of coming into existence produces a ‘pro-death’ view of
abortion. More specifically, I shall argue that if fetuses at the earlier
stages of gestation have not yet come into existence in the morally
relevant sense, and coming into existence is always a harm, it
would be better if we aborted fetuses in those earlier stages. Along
the way I shall distinguish four kinds of interest and ask which of
these is morally significant, I shall discuss the question of when
consciousness begins, and then defend my and pro-choice views
about abortion against the most interesting challenges—those of
Richard Hare and Don Marquis.
The sixth chapter will examine two related sets of questions:
those about population and those about extinction. The population questions are questions about how many people there should
be. The extinction questions are questions about whether future
human extinction is to be regretted and whether it would be
worse if human extinction would come earlier rather than later.
My answer to the population question is that there should, ideally,
be no (more) people. However, I shall consider arguments that
might allow a phased extinction. In answering the extinction question, I shall suggest that although extinction may be bad for those
who precede it, particularly those who immediately precede it, the
state of human extinction itself is not bad. Indeed, I shall argue
that it would be better, all things being equal, if human extinction
happened earlier rather than later. In addition to these arguments
of general interest, I shall also show how my views solve many
Introduction ∼ 

well-known problems in moral theorizing about population size.
Here the focus will be on Part Four of Derek Parfit’s book, Reasons and Persons, showing how my views can solve the ‘non-identity
problem’, avoid the ‘absurd conclusion’ and the ‘mere addition
problem’, and explain ‘asymmetry’.
In the concluding chapter I shall discuss a number of issues.
I shall consider the question whether the implausibility of my
conclusions counts against my arguments and I shall argue against
the optimistic insistence that I must be wrong. I shall demonstrate
that my arguments are not as incompatible with religious thinking
as many people might think. I shall examine questions about death
and suicide. More specifically, I shall argue that one can think that
coming into existence is always a harm without having to think
that continuing to exist is always worse than death. Thus death
may be bad for us even if coming into existence is also bad. It
follows that suicide is not an inevitable implication of my view,
even though it may be one possible response, at least in some
cases. Finally, the conclusion will show that although the anti-natal
view is philanthropically motivated, there are very compelling
misanthropic arguments for the same conclusion.

A READER’S GUIDE
Not every reader may be inclined or have time to read the
whole book and thus I offer some advice on prioritizing. The
most important chapters are Chapter  (and more specifically
the section entitled ‘Why coming into existence is always a
harm’) and Chapter . The opening section of the concluding
chapter, Chapter , is also important for those who think that my
conclusions should be rejected on the grounds of being deeply
counter-intuitive.
Chapters , , and  all presuppose the conclusions of Chapters 
and  and thus cannot be read profitably without the earlier

 ∼ Introduction

chapters in mind. Whereas Chapter  does not rest on Chapter ,
Chapter  does presuppose the conclusions of Chapter  (but
not of Chapter ). This logical ordering of the chapters roughly
approximates another ordering. Chapter  is the ‘bad news’,
Chapter  the ‘worse news’ and one or more of Chapters , , and 
(depending on one’s views) contains the ‘worst news’.
Much of this book will be readily accessible to an intelligent
reader who has no background in Philosophy. There are some
sections that, of necessity, are somewhat more technical. Although
grasping every detail of these sections may be more difficult, the
gist of the argument should nonetheless be clear. However, there
are some sections that a reader less interested in the more technical
details could skip. This is true of the occasional paragraph scattered
throughout the book, but it is also true of more substantial
sections.
In Chapter , the first six paragraphs of ‘Four kinds of interest’
are crucial to that chapter. Those readers not interested in how
that taxonomy maps onto competing taxonomies in the literature
of moral philosophy may skip the rest of that section.
The most technical parts of the book are in Chapter , in
the section entitled ‘Solving Problems in Moral Theory about
Population’. In that section I show how my views help solve
problems that have been discussed in an extensive philosophical
literature about future people and optimum population size.
Those without knowledge of and interest in this literature could
skip that section. Doing so will make it somewhat more difficult
to understand much of my discussion, later in Chapter , about
phased extinction. Some of that discussion is also quite technical
and thus could also be avoided. Any reader who does that
need only know that I argue that my views might allow, under
some conditions, for a phased extinction, whereby fewer and
fewer children are brought into existence in each of (only) a few
successive generations, rather than an immediate cessation of all
baby-making.
Introduction ∼ 


Why Coming into Existence
Is Always a Harm
Never to have been born is best
But if we must see the light, the next best
Is quickly returning whence we came.
When youth departs, with all its follies,
Who does not stagger under evils? Who escapes them?
Sophocles¹
Sleep is good, death is better; but of course,
The best would be never to have been born at all.
Heinrich Heine²

C A N C O M I N G I N TO E X I S T E N C E
EVER BE A HARM?
Before it can be argued that coming into existence is always a harm,
it must first be shown that it can ever be a harm to come into
existence. Some might wonder why this is so, for common sense
¹ Sophocles, Oedipus at Colonus, lines –.
² Heine, Heinrich, Morphine, lines –.

suggests that a life can be so bad that coming into existence with
such a life is most certainly a harm. This view, however, faces a
serious challenge—one that has often been called the ‘non-identity
problem’³ or the ‘paradox of future individuals’.⁴ I begin, then, by
explaining this problem and showing how it can be resolved.
The problem arises in those cases where the only alternative to
bringing a person into existence with a poor quality of life is not
to bring that person into existence at all. In such circumstances
it is impossible to bring the same person into existence without
the condition that is thought to be harmful. This may occur, for
instance, where prospective parents are carriers of a serious genetic
disorder which, for one reason or another, they will pass on to
their offspring. The choice is either to bring a defective child into
existence or not to bring that child into existence at all.⁵ On other
occasions the defective condition is not attributable to the person’s
constitution, genetic or otherwise, but rather to his⁶ environment.
This is the case with the fourteen-year old girl who has a baby but
because of her own tender age is unable to provide it with adequate
opportunities.⁷ If she conceives a child when she is older and better
able to care for it, it will not be the same child (because it will have
been formed from different gametes). So her alternative to bringing
a socially compromised child into existence when she is fourteen
years old is not to bring that child into existence at all, irrespective
of whether she later has another child.
³ Parfit, Derek, Reasons and Persons, .
⁴ Kavka, Gregory S., ‘The Paradox of Future Individuals’ in Philosophy and Public
Affairs, / () –.
⁵ The development of genetic engineering may reduce the number of instances
in which one is faced with such a choice, as it may be possible to bring the person
into existence and correct the defect. However, it seems that at least some disorders
will be such that eliminating them will amount to altering the identity of the being
subject to the genetic engineering. In such cases the choice will be between bringing a
defective child into existence or bringing a healthy, but different, child into existence.
⁶ For a defence of the use of this pronoun see Benatar, David, ‘Sexist Language:
Alternatives to the Alternatives’, Public Affairs Quarterly, / () –.
⁷ The example is Derek Parfit’s. See his Reasons and Persons, .

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

Whereas the claim that coming into existence is always a harm
runs counter to most (but not all) people’s intuitions, the claim
that coming into existence in the aforementioned cases is a harm
accords very well with popular intuition. Yet many jurists and
philosophers have thought, for reasons I shall explain, that there
is a logical obstacle to claiming that people whose impairments are
inseparable from their existence are harmed by being brought into
existence disabled.

Lives worth living and lives not worth living
There is a common distinction, in the literature about this problem,
between impairments that make a life not worth living and impairments that, although severe, are not so bad as to make life not worth
living. Some have made the strong claim that even where impairments make a life not worth living, we cannot claim that those
people whose existence is inseparable from such impairments are
harmed by being brought into existence. In support of this, the
following sort of argument is advanced:
. For something to harm somebody, it must make that person
worse off.⁸
. The ‘worse off’ relation is a relation between two states.
. Thus, for somebody to be worse off in some state (such as
existence), the alternative state, with which it is compared,
must be one in which he is less badly (or better) off.
. But non-existence is not a state in which anybody can be, and
thus cannot be compared with existence.
⁸ In this formulation, I gloss over the issue of what it must make the person
worse off than. This is because it does not make any difference, in the context of
this argument, whether we say ‘worse off than he was’ or ‘worse off than he would
have been’. For more on problems with each of these views see, Feinberg, Joel,
‘Wrongful Life and the Counterfactual Element in Harming’ in Freedom and Fulfilment
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, ) –.

 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

. Thus coming into existence cannot be worse than never
coming into existence.
. Therefore, coming into existence cannot be a harm.
One way of responding to this argument is to deny the first
premiss’s claim that for something to harm somebody it must (that
is, always) make that person worse off. For something to harm
somebody, it might be sufficient that it be bad for that person⁹ on
condition that the alternative would not have been bad.¹⁰ On this
view of harm, coming into existence can be a harm. If a life is bad
for the person brought into existence, as it must be if the life is not
worth living, then that person’s coming into existence is a harm
(given that the alternative would not have been bad).
Joel Feinberg offers a different response to the argument that
coming into existence can never be a harm. Instead of denying that
to harm is to make somebody worse off, he disputes the assumption
that to be worse off in a particular condition, it must be the case that
one would have existed in the alternative condition with which it
is compared.¹¹ What we mean when we say that somebody would
have been better off not having come into existence is that nonexistence would have been preferable. Professor Feinberg offers
the analogy of judgements about ceasing to exist. When a person
claims that his life is so bad that he would be better off dead, he
need not mean literally that were he to die he would exist in some
better state (although some people do believe this). Instead he may
⁹ Derek Parfit makes a similar move (suggested to him by Jeff McMahan), but
with reference to ‘better’ rather than ‘worse’, in his argument that causing somebody
to exist could benefit that person. Professor Parfit says that we ‘may admit. . .causing
someone to exist cannot be better for this person. But it may be good for this person.’
(Reasons and Persons, .)
¹⁰ This qualification avoids the complications (for a comparative view of harm)
posed by those cases such as the following: You are trapped in a burning car and
the only way I can save your life is by cutting off your hand and releasing you.
Being handless is surely bad for you, but, all things being equal, I have nonetheless
benefited you. And if I have benefited you then I have not harmed you (all things
considered).
¹¹ Feinberg, Joel, ‘Wrongful Life and the Counterfactual Element in Harming’.

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

mean that he prefers not to be, rather than to continue living in his
condition. He has determined that his life is not worth living—that
it is not worth continuing to be. Just as life can be so bad that ceasing
to exist is preferable, so life can be so bad that never coming into
existence is preferable. Comparing somebody’s existence with his
non-existence is not to compare two possible conditions of that
person. Rather it is to compare his existence with an alternative
state of affairs in which he does not exist.
It has generally been thought that those cases where the impairment, although severe, is not so bad as to make life not worth living
are more difficult than cases where the impairment is so great as
to make life not worth living. It has been said that because the
former, by definition, are cases of lives worth living, one cannot
judge never existing to be preferable to existing with such a life. The
force of this argument, however, rests on a crucial ambiguity in the
expression ‘a life worth living’—an ambiguity I shall now probe.

Lives worth starting and lives worth continuing
The expression ‘a life worth living’ is ambiguous between ‘a life
worth continuing’—let us call this the present-life sense—and ‘a life
worth starting’—let us call this the future-life sense.¹² ‘A life worth
continuing’, like ‘a life not worth continuing’, are judgements
one can make about an already existent person. ‘A life worth
starting’, like ‘a life not worth starting’, are judgements one can
make about a potential but non-existent being. Now the problem
is that a number of people have employed the present-life sense
and applied it to future-life cases,¹³ which are quite different. When
¹² A similar ambiguity characterizes the use of the expression ‘a minimally decent
life’ in discussions of wrongful life. This expression may mean ‘a life that is sufficiently
decent to be worth continuing’ (the present-life sense) or ‘a life that is sufficiently
decent to be worth bringing about’ (the future-life sense).
¹³ e.g. Parfit, Derek, Reasons and Persons, –; Feinberg, Joel, ‘Wrongful Life
and the Counterfactual Element in Harming’, . Bernard Williams makes the same
mistake when he says ‘I see no way of denying that one who resents his own

 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

they distinguish between impairments that make a life not worth
living and impairments that, though severe, are not so bad as to
make life not worth living, they are making the judgements in
the present-life cases. Those lives not worth living are those that
would not be worth continuing. Similarly, those lives worth living
are those that are worth continuing. But the problem is that these
notions are then applied to future-life cases.¹⁴ In this way, we are
led to make judgements about future-life cases by the standards of
present-life cases.
However, quite different standards apply in the two kinds of
case. The judgement that an impairment is so bad that it makes life
not worth continuing is usually made at a much higher threshold
than the judgement that an impairment is sufficiently bad to make
life not worth beginning. That is to say, if a life is not worth
continuing, a fortiori it is not worth beginning. It does not follow,
however, that if a life is worth continuing it is worth beginning or
that if it is not worth beginning it would not be worth continuing.
For instance, while most people think that living life without a limb
does not make life so bad that it is worth ending, most (of the
same) people also think that it is better not to bring into existence
somebody who will lack a limb. We require stronger justification
for ending a life than for not starting one.¹⁵
We are now in a position to understand how it might be preferable not to begin a life worth living. The paradoxical appearance
existence prefers that he should not have existed; and no way of interpreting that
preference except in terms of thinking that one’s life is not worth living.’ (‘Resenting
one’s own existence’ in Making Sense of Humanity (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, ) .)
¹⁴ Joel Feinberg, for example, says the following in the context of wrongful life
suits: ‘Is non-existence in fact ever rationally preferable to a severely encumbered
existence? Surely, in most cases of suffering and impairment we think of death as
even worse.’ (‘Wrongful Life and the Counterfactual Element in Harming’, .) In
the context ‘non-existence’ refers to never existing (as opposed to ceasing to exist).
Yet he answers the question by contrasting the impaired life with death.
¹⁵ Something similar is true in more trivial cases. Consider, for example, an
evening at the cinema. A film might be bad enough that it would have been better
not to have gone to see it, but not so bad that it is worth leaving before it finishes.

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

of such a view rests on understanding ‘a life worth living’ in the
future-life sense. Clearly, it would be odd to claim that it is preferable not to start a life that is worth starting. However, the future-life
sense is not the relevant sense in this context, because we are
considering the contrast to a life not worth continuing—namely
a life worth continuing. There is nothing paradoxical about the
claim that it is preferable not to begin a life that would be worth
continuing.
My argument so far rests on the view that there is a morally
important distinction between future-life and present-life cases.
There are some lines of argument that threaten to diminish the
importance of this distinction and thus weaken my case. I wish to
reply to each.
First, I consider an argument of Derek Parfit’s. He suggests that
if I am benefited by having my life saved just after it started, (even
if at the expense of acquiring some severe but non-catastrophic
impairment), then it is not implausible to claim that I am benefited
by having my life started (with such an impairment).¹⁶ This argument seeks to minimize the significance of the distinction between
future-life and present-life cases. On this view it is not unreasonable to think that impairments that are inflicted in the course of
saving a life are morally comparable to similar impairments that
are inseparable from bringing a life into existence.
One objection to this argument is that it rests on a shaky
premiss—namely, that one is benefited by having one’s life saved
just after it is started, if that entails one’s having a severe (even
though non-catastrophic) defect for the rest of one’s life. Although
at first sight this premiss may seem firm and widely accepted,
a little probing reveals its weakness. The problem is that it is
¹⁶ This argument, without the parenthetical parts, can be found in ‘Whether
Causing Somebody To Exist Can Benefit This Person’ in Reasons and Persons,
appendix G, . The version of the argument that includes the parenthetical parts
was suggested by Derek Parfit in comments on an early ancestor of this chapter. For
these comments I am grateful.

 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

implicitly assumed that there is some point, even if approximate,
at which a being comes into existence in a morally relevant
sense—that is, in the sense of having an interest deserving of moral
consideration. However, as the extensive literature about abortion
suggests, coming into existence in the morally relevant sense is
more like a very extended process than an event. I was once a
fertilized ovum. Arguably my conception¹⁷ was the time that I
came into existence in a strictly ontological sense. But it is much
less clear that this was also the moment that I came into existence
in a morally relevant sense. Although most people would agree
that to save my life now at the cost of my leg would confer a net
benefit on me, many fewer people would think that saving the life
of a conceptus at the cost of its living a life without a leg constitutes
a net benefit. That is why many more people support ‘therapeutic’
abortions even for non-catastrophic defects than condemn lifesaving amputations on ordinary adults. Some people support even
infanticide or at least passive euthanasia for neonates with severe
but non-catastrophic disabilities even though they would not
judge similar conduct to be in the interests of non-infant children
and adults with such defects. Those who exist (in the morally
relevant sense) have interests in existing. These interests, once fully
developed, are typically very strong and thus, where there is a
conflict, they override interests in not being impaired. However,
where there are no (or very weak) interests in existing, causing
impairments (by bringing people with defects into being) cannot
be warranted by the protection of such interests. The scope of the
class of beings without interests (or with very weak interests) in
existing is a matter of dispute. (Does it include embryos, zygotes,
infants?) In Chapter  I argue that at least zygotes, embryos, and
¹⁷ Or by about fourteen days thereafter, once the possibility of monozygotic
twinning has largely passed. One would have to date the beginning of a being’s
irreversible individuality still later if one wished to take the phenomenon of
conjoined twins into account. (For more on this, see Singer, Peter; Kuhse, Helga;
Buckle, Stephen; Dawson, Karen; and Kasimba, Pascal, eds., Embryo Experimentation
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ) –, –.)

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

fetuses until quite late in gestation have not begun existing in
a morally relevant sense and that coming to exist in a morally
relevant sense is a gradual process.
These reflections undermine the notion that there is any such
stage as ‘just after one comes into existence’ (in the morally
relevant sense of ‘comes into existence’). If we view coming into
existence (in the morally relevant sense) as the extended process
that it is, then we are likely to permit greater life-saving sacrifices as
a being’s interest in existing develops. The neat contrast between
starting a life and saving a life just after it is started falls away.
It accordingly becomes much less plausible to make an inference
from the case of saving a life after it has started to the case of
starting a life, as they are seen to be much farther apart.
Now some might think that the gradualist view about coming
into existence undermines my distinction between future-life cases
and present-life cases. This, however, is not true. That the distinction between them is a gradual one does not render the distinction void. Nothing I have said excludes the possibility of a middle
ground linking the two kinds of cases. Nor is the moral significance
of the distinction compromised so long as one does not, as I do not,
reject a moral sensitivity to the gradualism of the continuum that
links clear future-life cases with clear present-life cases.
The next possible threat to the distinction between present-life
cases and future-life cases comes from a line of reasoning advanced
by Joel Feinberg. He suggests, as I indicated earlier, that we
understand the claim that somebody would have been better off
not coming into existence as the assertion that that being’s never
existing would have been preferable. This assertion, he claims
correctly, is not plagued by any logical difficulties. However, he
goes on to advance an account of when it is preferable not to come
into being,¹⁸ such that, in almost all cases, never existing cannot
be said to be preferable. He distinguishes between judgements
¹⁸ ‘Wrongful Life and the Counterfactual Element in Harming’, –.

 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

by competent adults or mature older children that it would
have been preferable if they had never come into existence, and
similar judgements made by proxies on behalf of those who
are so extremely impaired that they cannot make judgements
themselves. In the case of the extremely impaired, he thinks, it is
insufficient that the judgement of the preferability of never existing
be consistent with reason. It must be dictated (or required) by reason.
He thinks that this requirement is met for very few disabling
conditions—those where death is preferable.¹⁹ In the case of
competent beings’ making the judgement that their never existing
would have been preferable, he allows that it be merely consistent
with reason (that is, not irrational). Although it is much easier
for a judgement to satisfy the requirement that it be consistent
with reason, it is a fact of human psychology that very rarely
do people—even those enduring considerable hardships—prefer
not to have existed. The result is that on Professor Feinberg’s
view, most beings who are brought into existence with disabilities
which although not so bad as to make life worth ending are
nonetheless severe cannot be said to be harmed. One can only be
harmed if it would have been preferable that one did not come into
existence, and on his interpretation of this requirement it is met
only very rarely.
The reason why this account conflicts with my distinction
between present-life cases and future-life cases is that implicit in
it is the requirement that we make judgements about future-life
cases through the lens of present-life cases. Either life has to be
so bad that it would not be worth continuing —Professor Feinberg’s
standard for proxy decisions—or it has to be the case that already
existing people with that disability would prefer never to have
come into existence—his standard for those whose disabilities
do not impair their competence to decide (retrospectively!) for
themselves.
¹⁹ ‘Wrongful Life and the Counterfactual Element in Harming’, .

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

However, it is precisely because Professor Feinberg’s account
requires us to adopt the perspective of already existing people
that it is inadequate. In asking whether a life is worth starting,
we should not have to consider whether it would not be worth
continuing. Nor should we have to appeal to the preferences of
already existing people about their own lives to make judgements
about future lives. As I shall show in the second section of the next
chapter, self-assessments of one’s life’s quality are unreliable.
Although I reject Professor Feinberg’s account of when it
is preferable not to come into existence, I agree that we can
understand the notion of harming somebody by bringing him into
existence, in terms of the preferability of either existing or never
existing. That is to say, one harms somebody by bringing him
into existence if his existence is such that never existing would
have been preferable. Similarly, a person is not harmed by being
brought into existence if his existence is such that it is preferable to
never existing. The question to which we must now turn, then, is
‘When is never existing preferable?’ Put another way, ‘When does
coming into existence harm?’ Alternatively we can ask, ‘When is
coming into existence bad while never coming into existence not
bad?’ The answer, I shall now argue, is ‘Always’.

W H Y C O M I N G I N TO E X I S T E N C E
I S A LWAYS A H A R M
There is a common assumption in the literature about future
possible people that, all things being equal, one does no wrong
by bringing into existence people whose lives will be good on
balance. This assumption rests on another—namely that being
brought into existence (with decent life prospects) is a benefit (even
though not being brought into existence is not a harm). I shall
argue that the underlying assumption is erroneous. Being brought
into existence is not a benefit but always a harm. When I say
 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

that coming into existence is always a harm, I do not mean that
it is necessarily a harm. As will become apparent, my argument
does not apply to those hypothetical cases in which a life contains
only good and no bad. About such an existence I say that it is
neither a harm nor a benefit and we should be indifferent between
such an existence and never existing. But no lives are like this. All
lives contain some bad. Coming into existence with such a life is
always a harm. Many people will find this deeply unsettling claim
to be counter-intuitive and will wish to dismiss it. For this reason,
I propose not only to defend the claim, but also to suggest why
people might be resistant to it.
As a matter of fact, bad things happen to all of us. No life is
without hardship. It is easy to think of the millions who live a life
of poverty or of those who live much of their lives with some
disability. Some of us are lucky enough to be spared these fates,
but most of us who are, nonetheless suffer ill-health at some stage
during our lives. Often the suffering is excruciating, even if it is in
our final days. Some are condemned by nature to years of frailty.
We all face death.²⁰ We infrequently contemplate the harms that
await any new-born child—pain, disappointment, anxiety, grief,
and death. For any given child we cannot predict what form these
harms will take or how severe they will be, but we can be sure that
at least some of them will occur.²¹ None of this befalls the nonexistent. Only existers suffer harm.
Optimists will be quick to note that I have not told the whole
story. Not only bad things but also good things happen only to
those who exist. Pleasure, joy, and satisfaction can only be had
by existers. Thus, the cheerful will say, we must weigh up the
pleasures of life against the evils. As long as the former outweigh
²⁰ Here I assume the ordinary view that death is a harm. There is a rich
philosophical literature on the ancient challenge to this view, which I shall consider
(too briefly) in Chapter . Those who think that death does not harm the person
who dies may simply leave death off my list of harms.
²¹ Only those who die very soon after coming into existence are spared much of
these harms, but obviously are not spared death.

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

the latter, the life is worth living. Coming into being with such a
life is, on this view, a benefit.

The asymmetry of pleasure and pain
However, this conclusion does not follow. This is because there is a
crucial difference between harms (such as pains) and benefits (such
as pleasures) which entails that existence has no advantage over,
but does have disadvantages relative to, non-existence.²² Consider
pains and pleasures as exemplars of harms and benefits. It is uncontroversial to say that
() the presence of pain is bad,
and that
() the presence of pleasure is good.
However, such a symmetrical evaluation does not seem to apply
to the absence of pain and pleasure, for it strikes me as true that
() the absence of pain is good, even if that good is not enjoyed
by anyone,
whereas
() the absence of pleasure is not bad unless there is somebody
for whom this absence is a deprivation.
Now it might be asked how the absence of pain could be good if
that good is not enjoyed by anybody. Absent pain, it might be said,
cannot be good for anybody, if nobody exists for whom it can be
good. This, however, is to dismiss () too quickly.
The judgement made in () is made with reference to the (potential)
interests of a person who either does or does not exist. To this it
²² The term ‘non-existence’ is multiply ambiguous. It can be applied to those who
never exist and to those who do not currently exist. The latter can be divided further
into those who do not yet exist and those who are no longer existing. In the current
context I am using ‘non-existence’ to denote those who never exist. Joel Feinberg
has argued that the not yet existent and the no longer existent can be harmed. I
embrace that view. What I have to say here applies only to the never existent.

 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

might be objected that because () is part of the scenario under
which this person never exists, () cannot say anything about an
existing person. This objection would be mistaken because () can
say something about a counterfactual case in which a person who
does actually exist never did exist. Of the pain of an existing person,
() says that the absence of this pain would have been good even if
this could only have been achieved by the absence of the person
who now suffers it. In other words, judged in terms of the interests
of a person who now exists, the absence of the pain would have
been good even though this person would then not have existed.
Consider next what () says of the absent pain of one who never
exists—of pain, the absence of which is ensured by not making
a potential person actual. Claim () says that this absence is good
when judged in terms of the interests of the person who would
otherwise have existed. We may not know who that person would
have been, but we can still say that whoever that person would
have been, the avoidance of his or her pains is good when judged
in terms of his or her potential interests. If there is any (obviously
loose) sense in which the absent pain is good for the person who
could have existed but does not exist, this is it. Clearly () does not
entail the absurd literal claim that there is some actual person for
whom the absent pain is good.²³
In support of the asymmetry between () and (), it can be
shown that it has considerable explanatory power. It explains at
least four other asymmetries that are quite plausible. Sceptics,
when they see where this leads, may begin to question the
plausibility of these other asymmetries and may want to know
what support (beyond the asymmetry above) can be provided
for them. Were I to provide such support, the sceptics would
²³ One could (logically) make symmetrical claims about the absence of
pleasure—that, when judged in terms of the (potential) interests of a person
who does or does not exist, this absence of pleasure is bad. However, () suggests
that this symmetrical claim, although logically possible, is actually false. I shall defend
() later. For now my aim has been only to show that () is not incoherent.

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

then ask for a defence of these further supporting considerations.
Every argument must have some justificatory end. I cannot hope
to convince those who take the rejection of my conclusion as
axiomatic. All I can show is that those who accept some quite
plausible views are led to my conclusion. These plausible views
include four other asymmetries, which I shall now outline.
First, the asymmetry between () and () is the best explanation
for the view that while there is a duty to avoid bringing suffering
people into existence, there is no duty to bring happy people into
being. In other words, the reason why we think that there is a duty
not to bring suffering people into existence is that the presence of
this suffering would be bad (for the sufferers) and the absence of
the suffering is good (even though there is nobody to enjoy the
absence of suffering). In contrast to this, we think that there is no
duty to bring happy people into existence because while their pleasure would be good for them, its absence would not be bad for them
(given that there would be nobody who would be deprived of it).
It might be objected that there is an alternative explanation for
the view about our procreational duties—one that does not appeal
to my claim about the asymmetry between () and (). It might be
suggested that the reason why we have a duty to avoid bringing suffering people into being, but not a duty to bring happy people into
existence, is that we have negative duties to avoid harm but no corresponding positive duties to bring about happiness. Judgements
about our procreational duties are thus like judgements about all
other duties. Now I agree that for those who deny that we have
any positive duties, this would indeed be an alternative explanation
to the one I have provided. However, even of those who do think
that we have positive duties only a few also think that amongst
these is a duty to bring happy people into existence.
It might now be suggested that there is also an alternative explanation why those who do accept positive duties do not usually think
that these include a duty to bring happy people into existence. It is
usually thought that our positive duties cannot include a duty to
 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

create lots of pleasure if that would require significant sacrifice on
our part. Given that having children involves considerable sacrifice
(at least to the pregnant woman), this, and not asymmetry, is the
best explanation for why there is no duty to bring happy people
into existence.
The problem, though, with this alternative explanation is that it
implies that in the absence of this sacrifice²⁴ we would have a duty
to bring happy people into existence. In other words, it would be
wrong not to create such people if we could create them without
great cost to ourselves. But this presupposes that the duty under
discussion is an all-things-considered duty. However, the interests
of potential people cannot ground even a defeasible duty to bring
them into existence. Put another way, the asymmetry of procreative (all-things-considered) duties rests on another asymmetry—an
asymmetry of procreative moral reasons. According to this asymmetry, although we have a strong moral reason, grounded in the
interests of potential people,²⁵ to avoid creating unhappy people,
we have no strong moral reason (grounded in the interests of
potential people) to create happy people.²⁶ It follows that although
the extent of the sacrifice may be relevant to other positive duties,
²⁴ Or even in its presence, if it is not thought to be great enough to defeat
this duty. Just how great must a sacrifice be to prevent a positive duty arising is a
complex and hotly disputed matter that I shall not consider here. There are not a few
people who think that the extent of the sacrifice that can be required of us is quite
considerable. See, for example, Singer, Peter, Practical Ethics nd edn. (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, ). Notice, by the way, that although Peter Singer’s
conclusions about the extent of our positive duties are radically counterintuitive,
that counterintuitiveness is not usually thought to suffice as an argument against his
position. Curiously, though, there is much less hesitance to treat my conclusions as
a reductio of my argument. I shall say more about this in Chapter .
²⁵ The condition that the moral reason (or duty) be grounded in the interests of
the potential person is an important one. Those who find plausibility in the claim
that we have a reason to create happy people tend to be motivated by impersonal
considerations—such as there being more happiness in the world. But these are not
considerations about the interests of the potential person.
²⁶ Jeff McMahan says that ‘the view that there is no strong moral reason to cause
a person to exist just because his life would contain much good. . .is deeply intuitive
and probably impossible to dislodge.’ The Ethics of Killing: Problems at the Margins of
Life (New York: Oxford University Press, ) .

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

this is moot in the case of a purported duty to bring happy people
into existence.
There is a second support for my claim about the asymmetry
between () and (). Whereas it is strange (if not incoherent) to give
as a reason for having a child that the child one has will thereby be
benefited,²⁷ it is not strange to cite a potential child’s interests as
a basis for avoiding bringing a child into existence. If having children were done for the purpose of thereby benefiting those children, then there would be greater moral reason for at least many
people to have more children. In contrast to this, our concern for
the welfare of potential children who would suffer is a sound basis
for deciding not to have the child. If absent pleasures were bad irrespective of whether they were bad for anybody, then having children for their own sakes would not be odd. And if it were not the
case that absent pains are good even where they are not good for
anybody, then we could not say that it would be good to avoid
bringing suffering children into existence.
Thirdly, support for the asymmetry between () and () can be
drawn from a related asymmetry, this time in our retrospective
judgements. Bringing people into existence as well as failing to
bring people into existence can be regretted. However, only
bringing people into existence can be regretted for the sake of
the person whose existence was contingent on our decision. This
is not because those who are not brought into existence are
indeterminate. Instead it is because they never exist. We can
regret, for the sake of an indeterminate but existent person that a
benefit was not bestowed on him or her, but we cannot regret, for
the sake of somebody who never exists and thus cannot thereby be
deprived, a good that this never existent person never experiences.
One might grieve about not having had children, but not because
the children that one could have had have been deprived of
existence. Remorse about not having children is remorse for
²⁷ In other words, it is odd to suggest that one can have a child for that child’s sake.

 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

ourselves—sorrow about having missed childbearing and childrearing experiences. However, we do regret having brought into
existence a child with an unhappy life, and we regret it for the
child’s sake, even if also for our own sakes. The reason why we do
not lament our failure to bring somebody into existence is because
absent pleasures are not bad.
Finally, support for the asymmetry between () and () can be
found in the asymmetrical judgements about (a) (distant) suffering
and (b) uninhabited portions of the earth or the universe. Whereas, at least when we think of them, we rightly are sad for inhabitants of a foreign land whose lives are characterized by suffering,
when we hear that some island is unpopulated, we are not similarly
sad for the happy people who, had they existed, would have populated this island. Similarly, nobody really mourns for those who
do not exist on Mars, feeling sorry for potential such beings that
they cannot enjoy life.²⁸ Yet, if we knew that there were sentient
life on Mars but that Martians were suffering, we would regret this
for them. The claim here need not (but could) be the strong one
that we would regret their very existence. The fact that we would
regret the suffering within their life is sufficient to support the asymmetry I am defending. The point is that we regret suffering but not
the absent pleasures of those who could have existed.
Now it might be objected that just as we do not regret the
absent pleasures of those who could have existed, we do not take
joy in the absent pain of those who could have existed. For if we
did, the objection goes, we should be overjoyed by the amount
of pain that is avoided, given how few of all the possible people
²⁸ That most people do not even think about the absent lives on Mars is itself
revealing. Once forced to think about these issues some will claim that they regret
absent Martian pleasure. Whether or not they do, I cannot see how one could
regret it for the sake of the (non-existent) Martians who would otherwise enjoy
that pleasure. It is curious, however, how some people will begin to say that they
do feel sorry for the absent Martians once they realize that not doing so supports
asymmetry and thus the conclusion that coming into existence is always a harm.
However, saying this and its making sense are two different matters.

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

ever become actual, and thus how much pain is avoided. But joy
is not the appropriate contrast to regret. Although we regret the
suffering of distant others, at least when we think about them,
we are not usually overcome with melancholy about it.²⁹ Thus
the important question is not whether we feel joy—the opposite
of melancholy—about absent pains but whether the absent pain
is the opposite of regrettable—what we might call ‘welcome’ or
simply ‘good’. The answer, I have suggested, is affirmative. If we
are asked whether the absent suffering is a good feature of never
existing, we would have to say that it is.
I have shown that the asymmetry between () and () explains
four other asymmetries. Given that these other asymmetries are
widely endorsed, we have good grounds for thinking that the
asymmetry between () and () is also widely accepted. That it is so
is not evidence of its truth, for the multitude can be and often are
wrong. However, it does show that my starting point should have
broad appeal.
The judgements supported by the asymmetry of () and () are
not universally shared. For example, positive utilitarians—who
are interested not only in minimizing pain but also in maximizing
pleasure—would tend to lament the absence of additional possible
pleasure even if there were nobody deprived of that pleasure.
On their view, there is a duty to bring people into existence if
that would increase happiness. This is not to say that all positive
utilitarians must reject the view about the asymmetry of () and
(). Positive utilitarians who are sympathetic to the asymmetry
could draw a distinction between (i) promoting the happiness of
people (that exist, or will exist independently of one’s choices) and
(ii) increasing happiness by making people. This is the now famous
distinction between (i) making people happy and (ii) making happy
people. Positive utilitarians who draw this distinction could then,
²⁹ That we do not have the more marked reaction is probably the result of a
psychological defence mechanism.

 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

consistent with positive utilitarianism, judge only (i) to be a
requirement of morality. This is the preferable version of positive
utilitarianism. Taking (ii) also to be a requirement of morality
mistakenly assumes that the value of happiness is primary and the
value of persons is derivative from this. However, it is not the case
that people are valuable because they add extra happiness. Instead
extra happiness is valuable because it is good for people—because
it makes people’s lives go better. To think otherwise is to think
that people are mere means to the production of happiness. Or,
to use another famous image, it is to treat persons as mere vessels
of happiness. But unlike a mere vessel, which is indifferent to how
much of a valued substance it contains, a person cares about how
much happiness he has.
If my arguments so far are sound, then the view about
the asymmetry between harm and benefit is both compelling
and widespread. My argument will proceed by showing how,
given the asymmetry between harm and benefit, it follows that
coming into existence is always a harm. In the concluding chapter
(Chapter ) I shall consider the objection of those who, when
they see where the asymmetry leads, would rather give it up
than accept the conclusion that coming into existence is always
a harm. The objection is that the conclusions of my argument
are more counter-intuitive than giving up the asymmetry would
be, and thus if either of these has to be sacrificed it should be
the asymmetry. I delay discussing this objection until the final
chapter because it applies not only to the counter-intuitiveness
of my conclusion so far but also to other counter-intuitive
conclusions for which I shall argue in coming chapters. (Those
who are impatient to see this objection addressed may turn
to the opening section—‘Countering the counter-intuitiveness
objection’—of Chapter .)
To show why, given the asymmetry I have defended, it is always
a harm to come into existence it is necessary to compare two
scenarios, one (A) in which X exists and one (B) in which X never
Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

exists. This, along with the views already mentioned, is represented
diagrammatically in Figure ..
Scenario A

Scenario B

(X exists)

(X never exists)

(1)

(3)
Presence of pain

Absence of pain

(Bad)

(Good)

(4)

(2)
Presence of pleasure

Absence of pleasure

(Good)

(Not bad)

Figure 2.1.

If I am correct then it is uncontroversially the case that () is bad
and () is good. However, in accordance with the considerations
mentioned above, () is good even though there is nobody to
enjoy the good, but () is not bad because there is nobody who is
deprived of the absent benefits.
Drawing on my earlier defence of the asymmetry, we should
note that alternative ways of evaluating () and (), according to
which a symmetry between pain and pleasure is preserved, must
fail, at least if common important judgements are to be preserved.
The first option is shown in Figure ..
Here, to preserve symmetry, the absence of pleasure () has
been termed ‘bad’. This judgement is too strong because if the
absence of pleasure in Scenario B is ‘bad’ rather than ‘not bad’ then

 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

Scenario A

Scenario B

(X exists)

(X never exists)

(1)

(3)
Presence of pain

Absence of pain

(Bad)

(Good)

(4)

(2)
Presence of pleasure

Absence of pleasure

(Good)

(Bad)

Figure 2.2.

we should have to regret, for X’s sake, that X did not come into
existence. But it is not regrettable.
The second way to effect a symmetrical evaluation of pleasure
and pain is shown in Figure ..
To preserve symmetry in this case, the absence of pain () has
been termed ‘not bad’ rather than ‘good’, and the absence of
pleasure () has been termed ‘not good’ rather than ‘not bad’. On
one interpretation, ‘not bad’ is equivalent to ‘good’, and ‘not good’
is equivalent to ‘bad’. But this is not the interpretation that is
operative in this matrix, for if it were, it would not differ from, and
would have the same shortcomings as, the previous matrix. ‘Not
bad’, in Figure ., therefore must mean ‘not bad, but not good
either’. Interpreted in this way, however, it is too weak. Avoiding
the pains of existence is more than merely ‘not bad’. It is good.
Judging the absence of pleasure to be ‘not good’ is also too weak
in that it does not say enough. Of course the absence of pleasure is
Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

Scenario A

Scenario B

(X exists)

(X never exists)

(1)

(3)
Presence of pain

Absence of pain

(Bad)

(Not bad)

(4)

(2)
Presence of pleasure

Absence of pleasure

(Good)

(Not good)

Figure 2.3.

not what we would call good. However, the important question,
when the absence of pleasure involves no deprivation for anybody,
is whether it is also ‘not bad’ or whether it is ‘bad’. The answer, I
suggest, is that it is ‘not good, but not bad either’ rather than ‘not
good, but bad’. Because ‘not bad’ is a more informative evaluation
than ‘not good’, that is the one I prefer. However, even those who
wish to stick with ‘not good’ will not thereby succeed in restoring
symmetry. If pain is bad and pleasure is good, but the absence of
pain is good and the absence of pleasure not good, then there is no
symmetry between pleasure and pain.

Comparing existing with never existing
Having rejected alternative evaluations, I return to my original
diagram. To determine the relative advantages and disadvantages
of coming into existence and never coming to be, we need to
compare () with (), and () with (). In the first comparison we see
 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

that non-existence is preferable to existence. Non-existence has an
advantage over existence. In the second comparison, however, the
pleasures of the existent, although good, are not an advantage over
non-existence, because the absence of pleasures is not bad. For the
good to be an advantage over non-existence, it would have to have
been the case that its absence were bad.
To this it might be objected that ‘good’ is an advantage over ‘not
bad’ because a pleasurable sensation is better than a neutral state.
The mistake underlying this objection, however, is that it treats
the absence of pleasure in Scenario B as though it were akin to the
absence of pleasure in Scenario A—a possibility not reflected in
my matrix, but which is implicit in () of my original description
of asymmetry. There I said that the absence of pleasure is not bad
unless there is somebody for whom this absence is a deprivation. The
implication here is that where an absent pleasure is a deprivation
it is bad. Now, obviously, when I say that it is bad, I do not mean
that it is bad in the same way that the presence of pain is bad.³⁰
What is meant is that the absent pleasure is relatively (rather than
intrinsically) bad. In other words, it is worse than the presence
of pleasure. But that is because X exists in Scenario A. It would
have been better had X had the pleasure of which he is deprived.
Instead of a pleasurable mental state, X has a neutral state. Absent
pleasures in Scenario B, by contrast, are not neutral states of some
person. They are no states of a person at all. Although the pleasures
in A are better than the absent pleasures in A, the pleasures in A are
not better than the absent pleasures in B.
The point may be made another way. Just as I am not talking about intrinsic badness when I say that absent pleasures that
deprive are bad, so I am not speaking about intrinsic ‘not badness’—neutrality—when I speak about absent pleasures that do
not deprive. Just as absent pleasures that do deprive are ‘bad’ in
³⁰ The only time it would be bad in that sense is where the absence of pleasure is
actually painful.

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

the sense of ‘worse’, so absent pleasures that do not deprive are
‘not bad’ in the sense of ‘not worse’. They are not worse than the
presence of pleasures. It follows that the presence of pleasures is
not better, and therefore that the presence of pleasures is not an
advantage over absent pleasures that do not deprive.
Some people have difficulty understanding how () is not an
advantage over (). They should consider an analogy which, because it involves the comparison of two existent people is unlike the
comparison between existence and non-existence in this way, but
which nonetheless may be instructive. S (Sick) is prone to regular
bouts of illness. Fortunately for him, he is also so constituted that he
recovers quickly. H (Healthy) lacks the capacity for quick recovery,
but he never gets sick. It is bad for S that he gets sick and it is good
for him that he recovers quickly. It is good that H never gets sick,
but it is not bad that he lacks the capacity to heal speedily. The
capacity for quick recovery, although a good for S, is not a real
advantage over H. This is because the absence of that capacity is
not bad for H. This, in turn, is because the absence of that capacity
is not a deprivation for H. H is not worse off than he would have
been had he had the recuperative powers of S. S is not better off
than H in any way, even though S is better off than he himself
would have been had he lacked the capacity for rapid recovery.
It might be objected that the analogy is tendentious. It is obvious that it is better to be Healthy than to be Sick. The objection
is that if I treat these as analogies for never existing and existing
respectively, then I bias the discussion toward my favoured conclusion. But the problem with this objection, if it is taken alone, is that
it could be levelled at all analogies. The point of an analogy is to
find a case (such as H and S) where matters are clear and thereby
to shed some light on a disputed case (such as Scenarios A and B in
Fig. .). Tendentiousness, then, is not the core issue. Instead, the
real question is whether or not the analogy is a good one.
One reason why it might be thought not to be a good analogy is
that whereas pleasure (in Fig. .) is an intrinsic good, the capacity
 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

for quick recovery is but an instrumental good. It might be argued
further that it would be impossible to provide an analogy involving
two existing people (such as H and S) that could show one of the
people not to be disadvantaged by lacking some intrinsic good that
the other has. Since the only unambiguous cases of an actual person lacking a good and not thereby being disadvantaged are cases
involving instrumental goods, the difference between intrinsic and
instrumental goods might be thought to be relevant.
This, however, is unconvincing, because there is a deeper
explanation of why absent intrinsic goods could always be thought
to be bad in analogies involving only existing people. Given that
these people exist, the absence of any intrinsic good could always
be thought to constitute a deprivation for them. In analogies
that compare two existing people the only way to simulate the
absence of deprivation is by considering instrumental goods.³¹
Because () and () make it explicit that the presence or absence of
deprivation is crucial, it seems entirely fair that the analogy should
test this feature and can ignore the differences between intrinsic
and instrumental goods.
Notice, in any event, that the analogy need not be read as proving that quadrant () is good and that quadrant () is not bad. That
asymmetry was established in the previous section. Instead, the
analogy could be interpreted as showing how, given the asymmetry, () is not an advantage over (), whereas () is a disadvantage relative to (). It would thereby show that Scenario B is
preferable to Scenario A.
We can ascertain the relative advantages and disadvantages of
existence and non-existence in another way, still in my original
matrix, but by comparing () with () and () with (). There are
³¹ Any instructive analogy for Scenarios A and B would have to involve a
comparison of two existing people. An analogy involving an existing and nonexisting person would be no clearer than the case we are trying to illuminate. Thus
we cannot be required to consider analogies that compare a person’s existence with
his never existing.

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

benefits both to existing and non-existing. It is good that existers
enjoy their pleasures. It is also good that pains are avoided through
non-existence. However, that is only part of the picture. Because
there is nothing bad about never coming into existence, but there is
something bad about coming into existence, it seems that all things
considered non-existence is preferable.
One of the realizations which emerges from some of the
reflections so far is that the cost-benefit analysis of the cheerful—whereby one weighs up () the pleasures of life against () the
evils—is unconvincing as a comparison between the desirability of
existence and never existing. The analysis of the cheerful is mistaken for a number of reasons:
First, it makes the wrong comparison. If we want to determine
whether non-existence is preferable to existence, or vice versa,
then we must compare the left- and the right-hand sides of the
diagram, which represent the alternative scenarios in which X
exists and in which X never exists. Comparing the upper and the
lower quadrants on the left does not tell us whether Scenario A
is better than Scenario B or vice versa. That is unless quadrants
() and () are rendered irrelevant. One way in which that would
be so is if they were both valued as ‘zero’. On this assumption A
can be thought to be better than B if () is greater than (), or to
put it another way, if () minus () is greater than zero. But this
poses a second problem. To value quadrants () and () at zero is
to attach no positive value to () and this is incompatible with the
asymmetry for which I have argued. (It would be to adopt the
symmetry of Fig. ..)
Another problem with calculating whether A or B is better by
looking only at () and (), subtracting the former from the latter, is
that it seems to ignore the difference, mentioned earlier, between
a ‘life worth starting’ and a ‘life worth continuing’. The cheerful
tell us that existence is better than non-existence if () is greater
than (). But what is meant by ‘non-existence’ here? Does it mean
‘never existing’ or ‘ceasing to exist’? Those who look only at () and
 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

() do not seem to be distinguishing between never existing and
ceasing to exist. For them, a life is worth living (that is, both
starting and continuing) if () is greater than (), otherwise it is
not worth living (that is, neither worth starting nor continuing).
The problem with this, I have already argued, is that there is good
reason to distinguish between them. For a life to be not worth
continuing, it must be worse than it need be for it not to be
worth starting.³² Those who consider not only Scenario A but also
Scenario B clearly are considering which lives are worth starting.
To determine which lives are worth continuing, Scenario A would
have to be compared with a third scenario, in which X ceases
to exist.³³
Finally, the quality of a life is not determined simply by subtracting the bad from the good. As I shall show in the first section of the
next chapter, assessing the quality of a life is much more complicated than this.
Now some people might accept the asymmetry represented in
Figure ., agree that we need to compare Scenario A with Scenario B, but deny that this leads to the conclusion that B is always
preferable to A—that is, deny that coming into existence is always
a harm. The argument is that we must assign positive or negative
(or neutral) values to each of the quadrants, and that if we assign
them in what those advancing this view take to be the most reasonable way, we find that coming into existence is sometimes preferable (see Fig. .).³⁴
³² Those who consider only Scenario A could offer different judgements about
when life is ‘worth starting’ and when it is ‘worth continuing’. They could do so
by setting different thresholds. Thus, they might say that for a life to be worth
continuing, () need only just outweigh (), but for a life to be worth starting,
() must be significantly greater than (). Although those who consider only Scenario
A could do this, there is no evidence that they are doing it. They seem to treat the
judgements alike. In any event, even if they could rectify this, their position would
still succumb to the other objections I am raising.
³³ In this scenario, which we might call Scenario C, the absence of pain would be
‘good’ and the absence of pleasure would be ‘bad’.
³⁴ I am grateful to Robert Segall for raising this challenge.

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

Scenario A

Scenario B

(X exists)

(X never exists)

(1)

(3)
Presence of pain

Absence of pain

(Bad)

(Good)

−

+

(4)

(2)
Presence of pleasure

Absence of pleasure

(Good)

(Not bad)

+

0

Figure 2.4.

Quadrant () must be negative, because it is bad, and quadrants
() and () must be positive because they are good. (I assume that
() must be as good as () is bad. That is, if () = −n, then () = +n).
Since () is not bad (and not good either), it should be neither positive nor negative but rather neutral.
Employing the value assignments of Figure . we add () and
() in order to determine the value of A, and then compare this
with the sum of () and (), which is the value of B. Doing this, we
find that A is preferable to B where () is more than twice the value
of ().³⁵ There are numerous problems with this. For instance, as I
shall show in the first section of the next chapter, it is not only the
ratio of pleasure to pain that determines the quality of a life, but
also the sheer quantity of pain. Once a certain threshold of pain is
passed, no amount of pleasure can compensate for it.
³⁵ Where () is only twice the value of (), A and B have equal value and thus
neither coming into existence nor never coming into existence is preferable.

 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

But the best way to show that Figure . is mistaken is to apply
the reasoning behind Figure . to the analogy of H (Healthy) and
S (Sick) mentioned earlier.
S
(1)

H
(3)

Presence of sickness

Absence of sickness

(Bad)

(Good)

−

+

(4)

(2)

+

Presence of capacity

Absence of capacity

for quick recovery

for quick recovery

(Good)

(Not bad)

0

Figure 2.5.

Following Figure ., it would be better to be S than H if
the value of () were more than twice the value of (). (This
presumably would be the case where the amount of suffering
that () saves S is more than twice the amount S actually suffers.)
But this cannot be right, for surely it is always better to be H
(a person who never gets sick and is thus not disadvantaged by
lacking the capacity for quick recovery). The whole point is that
() is good for S but does not constitute an advantage over H. By
assigning a positive charge to () and a ‘0’ to (), Figure . suggests
that () is an advantage over (), but it quite clearly is not. The
assignment of values in Figure ., and hence also in Figure .,
must be mistaken.³⁶
³⁶ To take the implications of the value assignments in Fig. . for Fig. . as
evidence that the analogy between the two cases must be inapt is another instance
of treating the avoidance of my conclusion as axiomatic.

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

Now it might be asked what the correct value assignments are,
but I want to resist that question because it is the wrong one to
ask. Figure . is intended to show why it is always preferable not
to come into existence. It shows that coming into existence has
disadvantages relative to never coming into existence whereas the
positive features of existing are not advantages over never existing.
Scenario B is always better than Scenario A for much the same
reason that it is always preferable to be H rather than S. Figure .
is not meant to be a guide to determining how bad it is to come into
existence.
There is a difference, I have indicated, between (a) saying that
coming into existence is always a harm and (b) saying how great a
harm it is. So far I have argued only for the first claim. The magnitude of the harm of existence varies from person to person, and
in the next chapter I shall argue that the harm is very substantial for
everybody. However, it must be stressed that one can endorse the
view that coming into existence is always a harm and yet deny that
the harm is great. Similarly, if one thinks that the harm of existence
is not great, one cannot infer from that that existence is preferable
to non-existence.
This recognition is important for warding off another potential
objection to my argument. One of the implications of my
argument is that a life filled with good and containing only the
most minute quantity of bad—a life of utter bliss adulterated
only by the pain of a single pin-prick—is worse than no life at
all. The objection is that this is implausible. Understanding the
distinction between (a) coming into existence being a harm and
(b) how great a harm it is, enables one to see why this implication
is not so implausible. It is true of the person enjoying this charmed
life marred only by a single brief sharp pain, that as pleasant as
his life is, it has no advantages over never existing. Yet coming
into existence has the disadvantage of the single pain. We can
acknowledge that the harm of coming into existence is minuscule
without denying that it is harm. Setting aside the matter of
 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

whether coming into existence is a harm, who would deny that
a brief sharp pain is a harm, even if only a minor one? And if
one acknowledges that it is a harm—one that would have been
avoided had that life not begun—why should one deny that a life
begun at that cost is a harm, even if only a minor one? Think again
of the analogy of S and H. If S gets sick only once, and then only
has a headache that quickly subsides, it is still better to be H (even
though not that much better). If all lives were as free of suffering
as that of the imagined person who suffers only a pin-prick, the
harms of coming into existence would easily be outweighed by the
benefits to others (including the potential parents) of that person
coming into existence. In the real world, however, there are no
lives even nearly this charmed.³⁷

Other asymmetries
I have argued that pleasure and pain are asymmetrical in a way
that makes coming into existence always a harm. After arguing in
the coming chapter that this harm is substantial, I shall discuss,
in Chapter , the implications of all this for procreation. It should
be clear now, however, that the idea that coming into existence is
always a serious harm raises a problem for procreation. Procreation
can be challenged in many other ways too, but the arguments of
Christoph Fehige³⁸ and Seana Shiffrin³⁹ have interesting parallels
with my argument.
Consider Seana Shiffrin’s argument first. The understanding of
benefit and harm implicit in my argument is similar to that which
she makes explicit in hers. She understands benefit and harm noncomparatively. That is to say, she understands them not as two
³⁷ I discuss the implications of this in Chapter  (‘Having Children’).
³⁸ Fehige, Christoph, ‘A Pareto Principle for Possible People’, in Fehige, Christoph,
and Wessels, Ulla, eds., Preferences (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, ) –.
³⁹ Shiffrin, Seana Valentine, ‘Wrongful Life, Procreative Responsibility, and the
Significance of Harm’, Legal Theory,  () –.

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

ends of a scale or as shifts up and down such a scale. Instead she
understands them as absolute conditions of, respectively, a positive
and a negative kind. Moreover, her argument, like mine, appeals
to an asymmetry between benefits and harms, albeit a different
asymmetry. She says that in the absence of evidence of a person’s
wishes to the contrary, it is permissible, perhaps obligatory, to
inflict a lesser harm on that person in order to prevent a greater
harm. By contrast, it would be wrong to inflict a harm that would
yield a greater (pure) benefit.⁴⁰ Thus, we take it to be acceptable
to break an unconscious (non-consenting) person’s arm in order
to prevent a greater harm, such as death, to that person. (This
is the ‘rescue case’.) However, we would condemn breaking that
person’s arm in order to secure some greater benefit, such as
‘supernormal memory, a useful store of encyclopedic knowledge,
twenty IQ points worth of extra intellectual ability, or the ability
to consume immoderate amounts of alcohol or fat without side
effects’.⁴¹ (Call this the ‘pure benefit case’.)
Since all existers suffer harm, procreation always causes harm.
Professor Shiffrin is prepared to grant (for the sake of argument?)
that ‘being created can benefit a person.’⁴² However, in accordance
with the asymmetry just mentioned, we may not inflict the
harm in order to secure the benefit. Although existing people
can sometimes authorize our inflicting harm in order to secure
some benefit for them, we can never obtain the consent of those
whom we bring into existence before we create them. Nor can we
presume hypothetical consent, she argues. There are four reasons
for this.⁴³ First, the person is not harmed if we fail to create him or
her. Secondly, the harms of existence may be severe. Thirdly, the
harms of life cannot be escaped without considerable cost. Finally,
⁴⁰ By ‘pure benefit’ she means ‘benefits that are only goods and which are not also
removals from or preventions of harm’ (ibid.). The intrinsic pleasures to which I
refer in Chapter  would be instances of ‘pure benefit’ whereas the relief pleasures to
which I refer are instances of ‘removals from harm’.
⁴¹ Ibid. .
⁴² Ibid. .
⁴³ Ibid. –.

 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

the hypothetical consent is not based on the individual’s values or
attitudes towards risk.
There are some interesting differences between Professor Shiffrin’s argument and mine. Her argument, at least on the surface,
does not preclude treating life’s goods as advantages over nonexistence (although, as I shall show, it does not require treating
them as such). On her view, even if pleasures and other goods
enjoyed by existers are advantages over non-existence, they are
not advantages that we may secure at the costs of existence.⁴⁴
Nor does her basic argument presuppose the asymmetry I have
defended. We can see this by comparing two scenarios that involve
existing people and that are not characterized by the asymmetry in
Figure .. The first of these scenarios is one in which a pure benefit is bestowed at the cost of a harm and the other is one in which
that harm is avoided at the cost of the pure benefit. Following the
pattern of the earlier matrices, we might represent this as shown in
Figure ..
My asymmetry does not apply in such a case, yet on Professor
Shiffrin’s asymmetry we would not be warranted in inflicting () to
secure (). Put another way, we may not bring about Scenario A
over Scenario B (absent the person’s consent). Even when applied
to cases of procreation, where (I have argued) my asymmetry does
apply, Professor Shiffrin’s prioritizing of B over A is not based on
my asymmetry but rather on hers.
This does not mean that my asymmetry is unconnected with
her argument, and it certainly does not mean that my asymmetry
is incompatible with it. We find, first, that at least one feature of
my asymmetry makes her case against procreation even stronger

⁴⁴ Or at least not without being prepared to compensate for the harms. Seana
Shiffrin is a little reticent about ruling out procreation entirely, although her argument
does seem to entail this conclusion and one suspects that she would embrace it. She
explicitly defends only the weaker claim that procreation is not a ‘straightforward,
morally innocent endeavor’ (ibid. ).

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

Scenario A

Scenario B

Pure benefit bestowed

Pure benefit not bestowed

(1)

(3)
Presence of harm
Absence of harm
(Bad)

(4)

(2)
Presence of benefit

Absence of pleasure

(Good)

(Bad)

Figure 2.6.

than her case against other bestowals of pure benefit that cause
harm. Professor Shiffrin notes that procreation is not like cases
of inflicting a harm in order to rescue somebody because ‘if the
benefit bestowed by creation is not conferred, the nonexistent
person will not experience its absence.’ She might have added
that in this regard procreation is unlike not only the rescue case,
but also non-procreative cases of bestowing pure benefit at the
cost of harm. Implicitly recognized here is that the absent benefit
when somebody is not brought into existence is not bad (quadrant
 of Fig. .). It is less clear how Professor Shiffrin views the
claim in quadrant () in Figure .—that the absence of harm when
somebody is not created is good. However, I suggest that that
claim too would strengthen her case against procreation (although
I recognize that she may not be aiming to strengthen this case).
Procreation would be more threatened if the absent harms were
good and not merely neither bad nor good.

 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

In response to Professor Shiffrin’s argument, it has been objected
that her asymmetry is not needed to explain the pure benefit
case—the case where some benefit is bestowed but at the cost
of a harm. It has been suggested⁴⁵ that in the pure benefit case
Seana Shiffrin describes, somebody’s rights have been violated (by
having his arm broken without his permission), and this explains
why the benefit may not be bestowed. It can only be bestowed by
violating a right not to be harmed. The implicit assumption here
is that in the case of procreation nobody’s rights are violated, at
least so long as the resultant life is one ‘worth living’.
One common basis for denying that procreation violates the
rights of the person created is that prior to procreation that person
does not exist and thus there can be no bearer of the right not
to be created. But this may be an unduly narrow view of rights
ascription—one that ignores the special features of procreation.
If, as I argued in the opening section of this chapter, one can be
harmed by being brought into existence, one could argue that the
right that protects against this kind of harm is a special kind of
right—a right that has a bearer only in the breach. Put another
way, we might say that one violates a right by performing some
action if, as a result of performing this action, there exists some
person who is wrongfully harmed. I acknowledge that this is an
unusual kind of right, but coming into existence is an unusual case.
If one could make sense of such a right, it would then not be an
objection to an argument that a person is wrongfully harmed that
there was no right not to be.⁴⁶
Those who agree that there is no logical obstacle to a right
not to be created might still argue that the pure benefit case fails
⁴⁵ Wasserman, David, ‘Is Every Birth Wrongful? Is Any Birth Morally Required?’,
DeCamp Bioethics Lecture (Princeton, ) unpublished manuscript, .
⁴⁶ Obviously much more needs to be said about this. I have sketched only the
outline of a response. It is not my aim to prove that there is a right not to come into
existence, but rather to show that coming into existence is always a harm. Later I
shall argue that we have a duty not to cause this harm.

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

to support the (unqualified) asymmetry that Seana Shiffrin wishes
to defend. This is because there are actually two kinds of pure
benefit cases (which she does not distinguish). First, there are those
involving autonomous beings. They have a right not to be harmed
without their consent, even for their benefit. Secondly, there
are those involving non-autonomous beings. Although they could
(logically) also have such a right, it could plausibly be argued that
they do not (morally) have such a right. Although there are limits
on the harms parents may inflict on a child for that child’s sake,
there certainly are cases where a child’s best interests (considering
both benefits and harms) may warrant the imposition of a harm.
Defenders of procreation might argue that although we may not
inflict a harm on an autonomous being without his consent even
if this will secure a greater benefit for him, we may sometimes
do otherwise in the case of children and, a fortiori, of potential
children. It is in response to such a criticism that it becomes helpful
for Seana Shiffrin to appeal to my asymmetry or, as she implicitly
does, at least to part of it. By denying that somebody’s best interests
can be served by being brought into existence, she can draw the
distinction between children and potential children, and thus ward
off the paternalistic objection that parents may inflict the harms
of life on a potential child for that child’s sake. I have argued that
making potential people actual is not in their interests.
Christoph Fehige’s argument is arguably even closer to mine
than Seana Shiffrin’s. He defends and then spells out the implications of a view that he calls ‘antifrustrationism’ (but which is
sometimes called what sounds like its opposite—‘frustrationism’).
According to this view, a satisfied preference and no preference
are equally good. Only an unsatisfied preference is bad. In other
words, he argues that although it is good to have fulfilled whatever
desires one might have, one is not better off having a fulfilled desire
than having no desire at all. By way of example, consider the case
in which we ‘paint the tree nearest to Sydney Opera house red and

 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

give Kate a pill that makes her wish that the tree nearest to Sydney
Opera House were red’.⁴⁷ Professor Fehige plausibly denies that
we do Kate any favour in doing this. She is no better off than had
we done nothing. What matters is not that people have satisfied
desires but that they do not have unsatisfied ones. It is the avoidance of frustration that is important. There is an asymmetry buried
here, as Figure . shows.
Scenario A

Scenario B

Preference exists

Preference does not exist

(1)
Unsatisfied
(Bad)
Good

(2)
Satisfied
(Good)

Figure 2.7.

Antifrustrationism implies that it would be better not to create
people. Their satisfied preferences will not be better than the
absence of their preferences had they not existed. However, their
unsatisfied preferences—of which there will be many—are worse
than the absence of their preferences if they were not created. () is
worse than B, but () is not better than B.
We can adapt Figure . to show more clearly its relation to the
asymmetry I have defended (see Fig. .).

⁴⁷ Fehige, Christoph, ‘A Pareto Principle for Possible People’, –.

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

Scenario A

Scenario B

(X exists)

(X never exists)
(3)

(1)

Absent preference that
Preference unsatisfied

would have been

(Bad)

unsatisfied (in A).
(Good)

(2)

(4)
Absent preference that

Preference satisfied

would have been

(Good)

satisfied (in A).
(Good)

Figure 2.8.

In this adaptation, I have taken the liberty of differentiating
() from () even though Professor Fehige does not do so. He
treats all absent preferences alike. However, it does not seem that
this differentiation is incompatible with his argument. I have also
labelled (), (), and () all as ‘good’. This is because Professor
Fehige says that absent preferences and satisfied preferences are
‘equally good’.⁴⁸ If this is the correct reading of Professor Fehige,
then his asymmetry is a little different from mine, even though it
yields the same result—that Scenario A is worse than Scenario B.
⁴⁸ Ibid. .

 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

However, there may be other ways of reading him. When he
says that () and Scenario B are ‘equally good’, he might not mean
to describe () and () as good. He might mean only that () is
no better than Scenario B. This is exactly what I meant when
I described () in Figure . as ‘not bad’. I meant that it was no
worse than (). The problem with describing () in Figure . as
‘not bad’ is that because Professor Fehige seems to treat () and
() as equivalent, () would also have to be labelled ‘not bad’. If ‘not
bad’ there meant the same as in ()—that is, ‘not worse’—then
() would not be worse than (). However, this seems too weak, as
I indicated earlier. () is better than (). The alternative, then, is to
postulate that if Professor Fehige differentiated () and () that he
would understand them differently. He might understand ‘not bad’
as meaning something different in the third and fourth quadrants
of Figure .. In () it would mean ‘better’ than (), while in () it
means ‘not worse’ than (). On this reading, we might label () as
‘good’, because ‘good’ is (sufficiently) better than ‘bad’. In this way,
Christoph Fehige’s asymmetry could be interpreted to be the same
as mine.
Whichever of these two readings one adopts, () is better than
(), and () is not worse than (). The same is true in Figure .. In
both, coming into existence (Scenario A) is worse than never coming into existence (Scenario B).

Against not regretting one’s existence
Those who think (with Alfred Lord Tennyson) that it is better to
have loved and lost than never to have loved at all⁴⁹ might think
that they can apply similar reasoning to the case of coming into
existence. They might want to say that it is better to have existed
and lost (both by suffering within life and then by ceasing to exist)
than never to have existed at all. I shall not pass judgement on
⁴⁹ Tennyson, Alfred Lord, In Memoriam, section , stanza  (lines  and ).

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 

whether it is indeed better to have loved and lost than never to
have loved at all. It suffices to say that even if that claim is true,
it does not entail anything about coming into existence. This is
because there is a crucial difference between loving and coming
into existence. The person who never loves exists without loving
and is thus deprived. That, on my account, is ‘bad’. (Whether it is
worse than loving and losing is another question.) By contrast, one
who never comes into existence is not deprived of anything. That,
I have argued, is ‘not bad’.
That coming into existence is a harm is a hard conclusion for
most people to swallow. Most people do not regret their very
existence. Many are happy to have come into being because they
enjoy their lives. But these appraisals are mistaken for precisely the
reasons I have outlined. The fact that one enjoys one’s life does
not make one’s existence better than non-existence, because if one
had not come into existence there would have been nobody to
have missed the joy of leading that life and thus the absence of joy
would not be bad. Notice, by contrast, that it makes sense to regret
having come into existence if one does not enjoy one’s life. In this
case, if one had not come into existence then no being would have
suffered the life one leads. That is good, even though there would
be nobody who would have enjoyed that good.
Now it may be objected that one cannot possibly be mistaken
about whether one’s existence is preferable to non-existence. It
might be said that just as one cannot be mistaken about whether
one is in pain, one cannot be mistaken about whether one is
glad to have been born. Thus if ‘I am glad to have been born’, a
proposition to which many people would assent, is equivalent to
‘It is better that I came into existence’, then one cannot be mistaken
about whether existence is better than non-existence. The problem
with this line of reasoning is that these two propositions are not
equivalent. Even if one cannot be mistaken about whether one
currently is glad to have been born, it does not follow that one
cannot be mistaken about whether it is better that one came into
 ∼ Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm

existence. We can imagine somebody being glad, at one stage in his
life, that he came to be, and then (or earlier), perhaps in the midst
of extreme agony, regretting his having come into existence. Now
it cannot be the case that (all things considered) it is both better
to have come into existence and better never to have come into
existence. But that is exactly what we would have to say in such a
case, if it were true that being glad or unhappy about having come
into existence were equivalent to its actually being better or worse
that one came into being. This is true even in those cases in which
people do not change their minds about whether they are happy
to have been born. Why so few people do change their minds is
explained, at least in part, by the unduly rosy picture most people
have about the quality of their own lives. In the coming chapter, I
show that (with the exception of real pessimists, who may have an
accurate view of how bad their lives are) people’s lives are much
worse than they think.

Why Coming into Existence Is Always a Harm ∼ 


How Bad Is Coming
into Existence?
You may look upon life as an unprofitable episode, disturbing the blessed calm of non-existence.
Arthur Schopenhauer¹
The fact of having been born is a very bad augury for immortality.
George Santayana²

I have argued that so long as a life contains even the smallest quantity of bad, coming into existence is a harm. Whether or not one
accepts this conclusion, one can recognize that a life containing a
significant amount of bad is a harm. I turn now to show that all
human lives contain much more bad than is ordinarily recognized.
If people realized just how bad their lives were, they might grant
that their coming into existence was a harm even if they deny
that coming into existence would have been a harm had their lives
contained but the smallest amount of bad. Thus this chapter can
¹ Schopenhauer, Arthur, ‘On the Sufferings of the World’, in Complete Essays of
Schopenhauer, trans. T. Bailey Saunders,  (New York: Willey Book Company, ) .
² Santayana, George, Reason in Religion (vol. iii of The Life of Reason) (New York:
Charles Scribner’s Sons, ) .

be seen as providing a basis, independent of asymmetry and its
implications, for regretting one’s existence and for taking all actual
cases of coming into existence to be harmful.
However, the arguments in this chapter can also be seen as a
continuation of the argument in Chapter . The conclusion that
coming into existence is always a harm tells us nothing about
the magnitude of that harm. In the current chapter I consider the
question of how bad it is to come into existence. The answer to
this question depends on how bad the resultant life is. Even though
everybody is harmed by being brought into existence, not all lives
are equally bad. Thus, coming into existence will be a greater harm
for some than for others. The worse a life is, the greater the harm
of being brought into existence. I shall argue, however, that even
the best lives are very bad, and therefore that being brought into
existence is always a considerable harm. To clarify, I shall not be
arguing that all lives are so bad that they are not worth continuing.
That is a much stronger claim than I need to make. Instead, I shall
be arguing that people’s lives are much worse than they think and
that all lives contain a great deal of bad.

W H Y L I F E ’ S QUA L I T Y
I S N OT T H E D I F F E R E N C E
B E T W E E N I T S G O O D A N D I T S BA D
Many will be tempted to assess the quality of a life simply by subtracting the disvalue of life’s negative features from the value of its
positive features. That is to say, they will assign values to quadrants () and () in my schema, and then subtract the latter from
the former.³ However, this way of determining a life’s quality is far
too simplistic. How well or badly a life goes depends not simply on
³ That the resultant number may sometimes be positive does not indicate, as I
showed in Chapter , that existence is better than non-existence.

How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

how much good and bad there is, but also on other considerations—
most prominently considerations about how that good and bad is
distributed.
One such consideration is the order of the good and bad. For
instance, a life in which all the good occurred in the first half,
and uninterrupted bad characterized the second half, would be a
lot worse than one in which the good and bad were more evenly
distributed. This is true even if the total amount of good and bad
were the same in each life. Similarly, a life of steadily inclining
achievement and satisfaction is preferable to one that starts out
bright in the very earliest years but gets progressively worse.⁴ The
amount of good and bad in each of these alternative lives may
be the same, but the trajectory can make one life better than
the other.
Another distributional consideration is the intensity of the good
and the bad. A life in which the pleasures were extraordinarily
intense but correspondingly few, infrequent, and short-lived might
be worse than a life with the same total amount of pleasure,
but where the individual pleasures were less intense and more
frequently distributed across the life. However, pleasures and
other goods can also be distributed too widely within a life, thereby
making them so mild as to be barely distinguishable from neutral
states. A life so characterized might be worse than one in which
there were a few more noticeable ‘highs’.
A third way in which the distribution of good and bad within a
life can affect that life’s quality derives from the length of life. To be
sure, the length of a life will interact dynamically with the quantity of good and bad. A long life with very little good would have
to be characterized by significant quantities of bad, if only because
the absence of sufficient good over such long periods would create
tedium—a bad. Nevertheless, we can imagine lives of somewhat
⁴ I am reminded of the (apocryphal?) story of a child who, having overachieved
in primary school, was welcomed by the principal of his new high school with the
following remark: ‘I see that you have a great future behind you.’

 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?

unequal length that share the same quantity of good and of bad.
One life might have more neutral features, sufficiently evenly distributed over the life not to affect the quantity of good or bad. In
such cases, one might plausibly judge the longer life to be better (if
the life is of sufficient quality to be worth continuing) or worse (if
it is not).
There is a further (non-distributional) consideration that can
affect an assessment of a life’s quality. Arguably, once a life reaches
a certain threshold of badness (considering both the amount and
the distribution of its badness), no quantity of good can outweigh
it, because no amount of good could be worth that badness.⁵ It is
just this assessment that Donald (‘Dax’) Cowart made of his own
life—or at least of that part of his life following a gas explosion that
burnt two-thirds of his body. He refused extremely painful, lifesaving treatment, but the doctors ignored his wishes and treated
him nonetheless. His life was saved, he achieved considerable
success, and he reattained a satisfactory quality of life. Yet, he
continued to maintain that these post-burn goods were not worth
the costs of enduring the treatments to which he was subjected.⁶
No matter how much good followed his recovery, this could not
outweigh, at least in his own assessment, the bad of the burns and
treatment that he experienced.
This point may be expressed more generally. Compare two
lives—those of X and Y—and consider, for simplicity’s sake, only
the amount of good and bad (and not also the distributional
considerations). X’s life has (relatively) modest quantities of good
and bad—perhaps fifteen kilo-units of positive value and five
kilo-units of negative value. Y’s life, by contrast, has unbearable
quantities of bad (say, fifty kilo-units of negative value). Y’s life also
⁵ Instead of thresholds, Derek Parfit speaks of compensated and uncompensated
suffering. (Reasons and Persons, .) Suffering is of one or other kind, depending on
whether it is found in a life that is worth living.
⁶ See, for example, Pence, Gregory E., Classic Cases in Medical Ethics, nd edn.
(New York, McGraw-Hill, ) , .

How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

has much more good (seventy kilo-units of positive value) than
does X’s. Nevertheless, X’s life might reasonably be judged less
bad, even if Y’s has greater net value, judged in strictly quantitative
terms—ten kilo-units versus twenty kilo-units of positive value.
This shows further why the assignment of values in Figure . (in
the previous chapter) must, as I argued there, be wrong.
From the foregoing reflections, it should be apparent that an
assessment of how bad a life is must be more complicated than
simply subtracting the good from the bad. It will not do, therefore,
to attempt to calculate how bad a life is simply by subtracting the
value of quadrant () from the value of quadrant ().

WHY SELF-ASSESSMENTS OF ONE’S
L I F E ’ S QUA L I T Y A R E U N R E L I A B L E
Most people deny that their lives, all things considered, are bad
(and they certainly deny that their lives are so bad as to make never
existing preferable). Indeed, most people think that their lives go
quite well. Such widespread blithe self-assessments of well-being, it
is often thought, constitute a refutation of the view that life is bad.
How, it is asked, can life be bad if most of those who live it deny
that it is? How can it be a harm to come into existence if most of
those who have come into existence are pleased that they did?
In fact, however, there is very good reason to doubt that these
self-assessments are a reliable indicator of a life’s quality. There are
a number of well-known features of human psychology that can
account for the favourable assessment people usually make of their
own life’s quality. It is these psychological phenomena rather than
the actual quality of a life that explain (the extent of) the positive
assessment.
The first, most general and most influential of these psychological
phenomena is what some have called the Pollyanna Principle,⁷ a
⁷ Matlin, Margaret W., and Stang, David J., The Pollyanna Principle: Selectivity in
Language, Memory and Thought (Cambridge MA: Schenkman Publishing Company,

 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?

tendency towards optimism.⁸ This manifests in many ways. First,
there is an inclination to recall positive rather than negative experiences. For example, when asked to recall events from throughout
their lives, subjects in a number of studies listed a much greater number of positive than negative experiences.⁹ This selective
recall distorts our judgement of how well our lives have gone
so far. It is not only assessments of our past that are biased, but
also our projections or expectations about the future. We tend to
have an exaggerated view of how good things will be.¹⁰ The Pollyannaism typical of recall and projection is also characteristic of
subjective judgements about current and overall well-being. Many
studies have consistently shown that self-assessments of well-being
are markedly skewed toward the positive end of the spectrum.¹¹ For
). The principle is named, of course, after Pollyanna, the protagonist of Eleanor
Porter’s children’s book of that name. (Porter, Eleanor H. Pollyanna, (London:
George G. Harrap & Co. ).)
⁸ This is also discussed at great length in Taylor, Shelley E., Positive Illusions:
Creative Self-Deception and the Healthy Mind (New York: Basic Books, ). There is
quite a bit of evidence that happier people with greater self-esteem tend to have a
less realistic view of themselves. Those with a more realistic view tend either to
be depressed or have low self-esteem or both. For a discussion of this see Taylor,
Shelley E., and Brown, Jonathon D., ‘Illusion and Well-Being: A Social Psychological
Perspective on Mental Health’, Psychological Bulletin, / () –.
⁹ The literature on this topic is reviewed by Matlin, M., and Stang, D. The
Pollyanna Principle, –. See also Greenwald, Anthony G. ‘The Totalitarian Ego:
Fabrication and Revision of Personal History’, American Psychologist, / ()
–.
¹⁰ For a review of some of this research see Taylor, S., and Brown, J., ‘Illusion and
Well-Being: A Social Psychological Perspective on Mental Health’, –. See also
Matlin, M., and Stang, D., The Pollyanna Principle, –. For examples of the primary
literature see Weinstein, Neil D., ‘Unrealistic Optimism about Future Life Events’,
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, / () –; Weinstein, Neil D.,
‘Why it Won’t Happen to Me: Perceptions of Risk Factors and Susceptibility’, Health
Psychology, / () –. The latter study suggests that the optimism extends
only to those aspects of one’s health that are perceived to be controllable.
¹¹ Inglehart, Ronald. Culture Shift in Advanced Industrial Society (Princeton NJ:
Princeton University Press, )  ff; Andrews, Frank M., and Withey, Stephen
B., Social Indicators of Well-Being: Americans’ Perspectives of Life Quality (New York:
Plenum Press, )  ff, ; For an overview of various studies see also Diener,
Ed., Diener, Carol, ‘Most People are Happy’, Psychological Science, / () –;
and Myers, David G., and Diener, Ed., ‘The Pursuit of Happiness’, Scientific American,
/ () –.

How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

instance, very few people describe themselves as ‘not too happy’.
Instead, the overwhelming majority claims to be either ‘pretty
happy’ or ‘very happy’.¹² Indeed, most people believe that they
are better off than most others or than the average person.¹³
Most of the factors that plausibly improve the quality of a
person’s life do not commensurately influence self-assessments
of that quality (where they influence them at all). For example,
although there is a correlation between people’s own rankings
of their health and their subjective assessments of well-being,
objective assessments of people’s health, judging by physical
symptoms, are not as good a predictor of peoples’ subjective
evaluations of their well-being.¹⁴ Even among those whose
dissatisfaction with their health does lead to lower self-reported
well-being, most report levels of satisfaction toward the positive
end of the spectrum.¹⁵ Within any given country,¹⁶ the poor
are nearly (but not quite) as happy as the rich are. Nor do
education and occupation make much (even though they do make

¹² Campbell, Angus., Converse, Philip E., and Rodgers, Willard L., The Quality of
American Life (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, ) –.
¹³ Matlin, M., and Stang, D. (The Pollyanna Principle, –) cite a number of
studies that reached this conclusion. See also Andrews, F. M., and Withey, S. B.,
Social Indicators of Well-Being, .
¹⁴ Diener, Ed., Suh, Eunkook M., Lucas, Richard E., and Smith, Heidi L.,
‘Subjective Well-Being: Three Decades of Progress’, Psychological Bulletin, /,
() . See also, Breetvelt, I. S., and van Dam, F. S. A. M., ‘Underreporting
by Cancer Patients: the Case of Response Shift’, Social Science and Medicine, /
() –. According to some studies, the handicapped and retarded have just as
much life satisfaction as normal persons (Cameron, Paul., Titus, Donna G., Kostin,
John., and Kostin, Marilyn., ‘The Life Satisfaction of Nonnormal Persons’, Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,  () –. Yerxa, Elizabeth J., and Baum,
Susan, ‘Engagement in Daily Occupations and Life-Satisfaction Among People with
Spinal Cord Injuries’, The Occupational Therapy Journal of Research, / () –).
¹⁵ Mehnert, Thomas., Krauss, Herbert H., Nadler, Rosemary., and Boyd, Mary.,
‘Correlates of Life Satisfaction in Those with Disabling Conditions’, Rehabilitative
Psychology, / () –, and especially p. .
¹⁶ Interestingly, self-assessments of happiness and life satisfaction do vary more
considerably between different countries. But everywhere there is a tendency
towards optimism. What varies is the degree of optimism. Inglehart, R., Culture Shift
in Advanced Industrial Society, .

 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?

some) difference.¹⁷ Although there is some disagreement about
how much each of the above and other factors affect subjective
assessments of well-being, it is clear that even the sorts of events
that one would have thought would make people ‘very unhappy’
have this effect on only a very small proportion of people.¹⁸
Another well-known psychological phenomenon that makes
our self-assessments of well-being unreliable and that explains
some (but not all) of the Pollyannaism just mentioned is the
phenomenon of what might be called adaptation, accommodation,
or habituation. When a person’s objective well-being takes a
turn for the worse, there is, at first, a significant subjective
dissatisfaction. However, there is a tendency then to adapt to
the new situation and to adjust one’s expectations accordingly.¹⁹
Although there is some dispute about how much adaptation occurs
and how the extent of the adaptation varies in different domains of
life, there is agreement that adaptation does occur.²⁰ As a result,
even if the subjective sense of well-being does not return to the
¹⁷ Andrews, F., and Withey, S., Social Indicators of Well-Being, –; Inglehart, R.,
Culture Shift in Advanced Industrial Society, –. Where extra education does make
a difference it may make people less happy. See, for example, Campbell, A., et al,
The Quality of American Life, .
¹⁸ For a review of the impact of various external factors on subjective assessments
of well-being, see Diener, Ed., et al, ‘Subjective Well-Being: Three Decades of
Progress’, –.
¹⁹ Campbell, A., et al, The Quality of American Life, –, . Brickman, Philip.,
Coates, Dan., and Janoff-Bulman, Ronnie. ‘Lottery Winners and Accident Victims:
Is Happiness Relative?’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, / () –.
Headey, Bruce., and Wearing, Alexander. ‘Personality, Life Events, and Subjective
Well-Being: Toward a Dynamic Equilibrium Model’, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, / () –. Suh, Eunkook., Diener, Ed., and Fujita, Frank., ‘Events
and Subjective Well-Being: Only Recent Events Matter’, Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, / () –. For a recent review of the literature see Ed
Diener, et al, ‘Subjective Well-Being: Three Decades of Progress’, –.
²⁰ For example, although not denying the phenomenon of adaptation, Richard A.
Easterlin thinks that the extent of adaptation is sometimes exaggerated. See his
‘Explaining Happiness’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, / ()
–, and ‘The Economics of Happiness’, Daedalus, Spring , –. As an
aside, it is interesting that Professor Easterlin makes the mistake of thinking that if
adaptation were complete, well-being could not be improved and ‘public policies
aimed at making people better off by improving their social and economic conditions
are fruitless’ (‘The Economics of Happiness’, ). But this presupposes that there is

How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

original level, it comes closer towards it than one might think,
and it comes closer in some domains than in others. Because the
subjective sense of well-being tracks recent change in the level of
well-being better than it tracks a person’s actual level of well-being,
it is an unreliable indicator of the latter.
A third psychological factor that affects self-assessments of wellbeing is an implicit comparison with the well-being of others.²¹ It is
not so much how well one’s life goes as how well it goes in comparison with others that determines one’s judgement about how well
one’s life is going. Thus self-assessments are a better indicator of
the comparative rather than actual quality of one’s life. One effect of
this is that those negative features of life that are shared by everybody are inert in people’s judgements about their own well-being.
Since these features are very relevant, overlooking them leads to
unreliable judgements.
Of these three psychological phenomena, it is only Pollyannaism that inclines people unequivocally towards more positive
assessments of how well their life is going. We adapt not only
to negative situations but also to positive ones, and we compare
ourselves not only with those who are worse off but also with
those who are better off than we are. However, given the force
of Pollyannaism, both adaptation and comparison operate both
from an optimistic baseline and under the influence of optimistic
biases. For example, people are more prone to comparing themselves with those who are worse off than with those who are better
off.²² Thus, in the best cases, adaptation and comparison reinforce
Pollyannaism. In the worst cases, they mitigate it but do not negate
it entirely. When we do adapt to the good or compare ourselves
no difference between one’s perceived (subjective) and actual (objective) level of
well-being.
²¹ See, for example, Wood, Joanne V., ‘What is Social Comparison and How
Should We Study it?’, Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, / () –.
²² This is discussed by Brown, Jonathon D., and Dutton, Keith A., ‘Truth and
Consequences: the Costs and Benefits of Accurate Self-Knowledge’, Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, / () .

 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?

with those who are better off than ourselves, our self-assessments
are less positive than they otherwise would be, but they do not
usually cause them to become negative.
The above psychological phenomena are unsurprising from an
evolutionary perspective.²³ They militate against suicide and in
favour of reproduction. If our lives are quite as bad as I shall still
suggest they are, and if people were prone to see this true quality
of their lives for what it is, they might be much more inclined to kill
themselves, or at least not to produce more such lives. Pessimism,
then, tends not to be naturally selected.²⁴

T H R E E V I E W S A B O U T T H E QUA L I T Y
O F L I F E , A N D W H Y L I F E G O E S BA D LY
ON ALL OF THEM
An influential taxonomy²⁵ distinguishes three kinds of theory
about the quality of a life. According to hedonistic theories, a
life goes well or badly depending on the extent to which it is
characterized by positive or negative mental states—pleasure and
pain (broadly construed). According to desire-fulfilment theories,
the quality of a person’s life is assessed in terms of the extent
to which his desires are fulfilled. What is desired might include
mental states, but it can also include states of the (external) world.
According to objective list theories, the quality of a life is determined
by the extent to which it is characterized by certain objective goods
and bads. On objective list theories, some things are good for us
irrespective of whether they bring pleasure in any given situation
²³ For much more on this see Tiger, Lionel, Optimism: The Biology of Hope (New
York: Simon and Schuster, ).
²⁴ This is not to say that there is no limit on the degree of optimism that has
an evolutionary advantage. Too much optimism can be maladaptive, and a certain
amount of pessimism has its advantages. See, for example, Waller, Bruce N., ‘The
Sad Truth: Optimism, Pessimism and Pragmatism’, in Ratio new series,  ()
–.
²⁵ Parfit, Derek, Reasons and Persons, –.

How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

and irrespective of whether we desire them. Other things are bad
for us whether or not they bring pain and whether or not we
desire them. Obviously objective list theories could differ from
one another on the basis of the goods and bads on their lists.
One author²⁶ suggests that the goods include accomplishment,
the ‘components of human existence’ (including agency, basic
capabilities, and liberty), understanding, enjoyment, and deep
personal relations. Another author lists possible candidate goods
as ‘moral goodness, rational activity, the development of one’s
abilities, having children and being a good parent, knowledge, and
the awareness of true beauty’.²⁷ This author suggests that among
the bad things would be ‘being betrayed, manipulated, slandered,
deceived, being deprived of liberty or dignity, and enjoying either
sadistic pleasure, or aesthetic pleasure in what is in fact ugly’.²⁸
Objective list theories are the most expansive of the three kinds of
theory in that they can include some pleasures and the fulfilment of
some desires, subject to the constraints of other features of the list.
To show how bad life is and therefore how bad it is to come into
existence, it is not necessary to choose between hedonistic, desirefulfilment, and objective list theories. Instead, it can be shown how
life is very bad irrespective of which of these sorts of theory one
adopts.

Hedonistic theories
Consider first the hedonistic view. Such a view will need to distinguish between three kinds of mental states—negative ones,
positive ones, and neutral ones. Negative mental states include
discomfort, pain, suffering, distress, guilt, shame, irritation, boredom, anxiety, frustration, stress, fear, grief, sadness, and loneliness. Positive mental states—pleasures, in the broad sense—can
be of two kinds. First, there are those which are relief from
²⁶ Griffin, James, Well-Being (Oxford: Clarendon Press, ) .
²⁷ Parfit, Derek, Reasons and Persons, .
²⁸ Ibid.

 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?

negative mental states. These relief pleasures include the subsiding
of a pain (such as a headache), the mollification of an itch, the
abatement of boredom, the alleviation of stress, the dissipation of
anxiety or fear, and the assuagement of guilt. Secondly, there are
the intrinsically positive states. Intrinsic pleasures include pleasant sensory experiences—tastes, smells, visual images, sounds, and
tactile sensations—as well as some non-sensory conscious states
(such as joy, love, and excitement). Some pleasures have both relief
and intrinsic components. For example, eating a tasty meal while
hungry brings both relief from hunger and the intrinsic pleasure
of fine-tasting food. (By contrast, eating insipid food while hungry
might relieve the hunger, but it would do so without the intrinsic pleasure.²⁹) Neutral mental states are those which are neither
negative, nor positive in either the relief or intrinsic sense. Neutral
states include the absence of pain, fear, or shame (as distinct from
gaining relief from these negative states).
For the psychological reasons mentioned earlier, we tend to
ignore just how much of our lives is characterized by negative
mental states, even if often only relatively mildly negative ones.
Consider, for example, conditions causing negative mental states
daily or more often. These include hunger, thirst, bowel and
bladder distension (as these organs become filled), tiredness, stress,
thermal discomfort (that is, feeling either too hot or too cold), and
itch. For billions of people, at least some of these discomforts are
chronic. These people cannot relieve their hunger, escape the cold,
or avoid the stress. However, even those who can find some relief
do not do so immediately or perfectly, and thus experience them
to some extent every day. In fact, if we think about it, significant
periods of each day are marked by some or other of these states.
For example, unless one is eating and drinking so regularly as to
prevent hunger and thirst or countering them as they arise, one is
likely hungry and thirsty for a few hours a day. Unless one is lying
²⁹ This is not to deny that food can taste better if one is hungry.

How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

about all day, one is probably tired for a substantial portion of one’s
waking life. How often does one feel neither too hot nor too cold,
but exactly right?³⁰
Of course, we tend not to think about how much of our lives
is marked by these states. The three psychological phenomena,
outlined in the previous section, explain why this is so. Because
of Pollyannaism we overlook the bad (and especially the relatively
mildly bad). Adaptation also plays a role. People are so used to
the discomforts of daily life that they overlook them entirely,
even though they are so pervasive. Finally, since these discomforts
are experienced by everybody else too, they do not serve to
differentiate the quality of one’s own life from the quality of
the lives of others. The result is that normal discomforts are not
detected on the radar of subjective assessment of well-being. That
we do not think of how much of our daily lives are pervaded by
the discomforts mentioned does not mean that our daily lives are
not pervaded by them. That there is so much discomfort is surely
relevant on the hedonistic view.
The negative mental states mentioned so far, however, are
simply the baseline ones characteristic of healthy daily life. Chronic
ailments and advancing age make matters worse. Aches, pains,
lethargy, and sometimes frustration from disability become an
experiential backdrop for everything else.
Now add those discomforts, pains, and sufferings that are experienced either less frequently or only by some (though nonetheless
very many) people. These include allergies, headaches, frustration, irritation, colds, menstrual pains, hot flushes, nausea,
hypoglycaemia, seizures, guilt, shame, boredom, sadness, depression, loneliness, body-image dissatisfaction, the ravages of AIDS,
of cancer, and of other such life-threatening diseases, and grief and
bereavement. The reach of negative mental states in ordinary lives
is extensive.
³⁰ The Goldilocks condition!

 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?

This is not to deny that there are also intrinsic pleasures in a
life. These pleasures sometimes occur in the absence of negative
mental states, and are best when they do. Intrinsic pleasures can
also coexist with the negative ones (so long as the negative states
are not of sufficient intensity to undo the pleasure entirely). Neutral
states and relief pleasures obviously can also affect the quality of a
life. It is better to have a neutral state than a negative one, and if one
has a negative state, relief from it (as soon as possible) is better than
no relief. Nevertheless, there would be something absurd about
living for neutral states or relief pleasures, or about starting a life in
order to create more neutral conscious states or to produce more
relief pleasure. Neutral states and relief pleasures can be valuable
only in so far as they displace negative states. The argument that it
is better never to come into existence explains why it is also absurd
to start a life for the intrinsic pleasures that that life will contain.
The reason for this is that even the intrinsic pleasures of existing
do not constitute a net benefit over never existing. Once alive, it
is good to have them, but they are purchased at the cost of life’s
misfortune—a cost that is quite considerable.

Desire-fulfilment theories
The foregoing is relevant to assessing the quality of a life not only
on a hedonistic view but also on a desire-fulfilment view. This is
because many of our desires are for positive mental states and the
absence of negative ones. Given just how many negative mental
states we have, the many desires for their absence are thwarted.
We also desire pleasures and some of those desires are satisfied.
However, as I shall show, there is a lot of dissatisfaction and
not that much satisfaction, contrary to what many people
think.
Notwithstanding the overlap between hedonistic and desirefulfilment theories, there is a clear difference between them. This
is because there can be positive mental states in the absence of
How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

fulfilled desires, and there can be fulfilled desires in the absence of
positive mental states. The former can occur when
a) one mistakenly believes that a desire has been fulfilled; or
b) one finds that one did not need the desire fulfilled in order
to attain the positive mental state.
The latter can occur when
a) one mistakenly believes that a desire has not been fulfilled; or
b) one’s desire was not for a positive mental state and the satisfaction of the desire does not bring about such a state; or
c) one finds that the fulfilled desire did not produce the positive
mental state one thought it would.
In all such cases desire-fulfilment theories require us to judge the
quality of a person’s life on the basis of whether the desires were
or were not fulfilled and not on the basis of whether or not one had
pleasant mental states.
Although one can be mistaken about how much of one’s life
has or will be characterized by positive mental states, one cannot
be mistaken about whether one is, right now, experiencing a
positive or a negative mental state. With desires, however, the
scope for error is arguably greater because one can be mistaken
right now about whether one’s desires have been fulfilled (unless
those desires are for pleasures). Thus we have less privileged
access to whether our desires have been satisfied. This introduces
further scope for error in self-assessments of well-being. Given
Pollyannaism, it is evident that this error will tend towards
overestimation of how good life is on the desire-fulfilment view.
Rather little of our lives is characterized by satisfied desires and
rather a lot is marked by unsatisfied desires. Consider first how
vulnerable our desires are to the vicissitudes of life. No desires for
that which we lack are ever satisfied immediately. Such a desire
must be present before it can be satisfied and thus we endure a
period of frustration before the desire is fulfilled. It is logically
 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?

possible for desires to be fulfilled very soon after they arise, but
given the way the world is, this does not usually happen. Instead,
we usually persist in a state of desire for a period of time. This
time may vary—from minutes to decades. As I said before, one
usually waits at least a couple of hours until hunger is satiated
(unless one is on a ‘hunger-prevention’ or a ‘nip-hunger-in-the-bud’
diet). One waits still longer to get rest when one is tired. Children
wait years to gain independence. Adolescents and adults can
wait years to fulfil desires for personal satisfaction or professional
success. Where one’s desires are fulfilled, this fulfilment is often
ephemeral. One desires public office and is elected but not reelected. One’s desire to be married is eventually fulfilled, but then
one gets divorced. One wants a holiday but it ends (too soon).
Often one’s desires are never fulfilled. One yearns to be free,
but dies incarcerated or oppressed. One seeks wisdom but never
attains it. One hankers after being beautiful but is congenitally and
irreversibly ugly. One aspires to great wealth and influence, but
remains poor and impotent all one’s life. One has a desire not to
believe falsehoods, but unknowingly clings to such beliefs all one’s
life. Very few people ever attain the kind of control over their lives
and circumstances that they would like.
Not all one’s desires are for that which one lacks. Sometimes
we desire not to lose that which we already have. Such desires,
by definition, have immediate satisfaction, but the sad truth is that
that fulfilment often does not last. One has a desire not to lose
one’s health and youth, but it happens all too quickly. The wrinkles
appear, the hair goes grey or falls out, the back aches, arthritis
ravages one’s joints, the eyes weaken, one becomes flabby and
saggy. One wishes not to be bereaved, but unless one’s desire not
to die is thwarted sooner rather than later, one must soon face the
death of grandparents, parents, and other dear ones.
As if this were not bad enough, consider next what we might
call the ‘treadmill of desires’. Although the fulfilment of some
desires is temporary because the fulfilment becomes undone, desire
How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

fulfilment is much more often temporary because even though the
desire remains fulfilled another desire arises in its place. Thus the
initial satisfaction soon gives way to new desires.
Among the psychologists who have recognized this is Abraham
Maslow, who famously observed a hierarchy of needs. (Although
there is a difference between needs and desires, they both have the
same feature I am discussing here.) Professor Maslow noted that
need gratifications lead only to temporary happiness which in turn tends
to be succeeded by another and (hopefully) higher discontent. It looks
as if the human hope for eternal happiness can never be fulfilled. Certainly happiness does come and is obtainable and is real. But it looks as if
we must accept its intrinsic transience, especially if we focus on its more
intense forms.³¹

And Ronald Inglehart noted that if getting what we wanted
made us lastingly happy, we would no longer engage in goalpursuing activities.³² Subjective well-being, he said, ‘reflects a
balance between one’s aspirations and one’s situation—and with
long term prosperity, one’s aspirations tend to rise, adjusting to the
situation’.³³
Abraham Maslow writes disapprovingly of our perpetual discontent.³⁴ By contrast, the great philosophical pessimist Arthur
Schopenhauer, who much earlier noted this fact of life, took it
to be inevitable.³⁵ Life, on the Schopenhauerian view, is a constant state of striving or willing—a state of dissatisfaction. Attaining that for which one strives brings a transient satisfaction, which
³¹ Maslow, Abraham, Motivation and Personality nd edn. (New York: Harper &
Row Publishers, ) p. xv.
³² Inglehart, R., Culture Shift in Advanced Industrial Society, .
³³ Ibid.
³⁴ He refers to the observation that we have this feature as ‘Grumble Theory’
(Motivation and Personality, p. xv). He refers to one’s ‘failing to count one’s blessings’
as ‘not realistic and can therefore be considered to be a form of pathology’ which,
he says, can in ‘most instances be cured very easily, simply by experiencing the
appropriate deprivation or lack’ (p. ).
³⁵ See, for example, Schopenhauer, Arthur, The World as Will and Representation,
trans. E. F. J. Payne (New York: Dover Publications, ) , .

 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?

soon yields to some new desire. Were striving to end, the result
would be boredom, another kind of dissatisfaction.³⁶ Striving is
thus an unavoidable part of life. We cease striving only when we
cease living.
Arthur Schopenhauer would also have rejected Professor
Maslow’s claim that happiness is real. On the Schopenhauerian
view, suffering is all that exists independently.³⁷ Happiness, for
him, is but a temporary absence of suffering. Satisfaction is the
ephemeral fulfilment of desire. In hedonistic terms, there are no
intrinsic pleasures. All pleasures are simply passing relief from negative mental states.
One need not reject, as Arthur Schopenhauer does, the independent existence of happiness to accept his view that suffering
is endemic to and pervasive in life. Fulfilled desires, like pleasures
(even of the intrinsic kind), are states of achievement rather than
default states. For instance, one has to work at satiating oneself,
while hunger comes naturally. After one has eaten or taken liquid,
bowel and bladder discomfort ensues quite naturally and we have
to seek relief. One has to seek out pleasurable sensations, in the
absence of which blandness comes naturally. The upshot of this
is that we must continually work at keeping suffering (including
tedium) at bay, and we can do so only imperfectly. Dissatisfaction
does and must pervade life. There are moments, perhaps even periods, of satisfaction, but they occur against a background of dissatisfied striving. Pollyannaism may cause most people to blur out this
background, but it remains there.
Now it may be objected that the foregoing makes matters sound
worse than they really are. Although our desires are not fulfilled
immediately and although a fulfilled desire gives way to a new
desire, the period during which the desire is unfulfilled and during
which we may strive towards its fulfilment is valuable. There
³⁶ Ibid. .
³⁷ Schopenhauer, Arthur, ‘On the Sufferings of the World’, in Complete Essays of
Schopenhauer, trans. T. Bailey Saunders,  (New York: Willey Book Company, ) .

How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

is something positive either in the striving or in the period of
deprivation, or both.
There are two ways of making sense of this objection on a desirefulfilment view. The first is to say that in addition to desiring whatever we desire, we desire striving to fulfil that desire. Thus the
striving fulfils a desire on the way to fulfilling another desire. As
a result our desires are not as unsatisfied as I have suggested they
are. The second way of making sense of the objection is to say that
whether or not we desire the period of deprivation or the striving
to fulfil our (other) desires, such a precursor to desire fulfilment
makes the eventual fulfilment that much sweeter.
On both of these interpretations the objection has its limitations.
I concede that some people do enjoy the process of fulfilling some
desires. There surely are some writers, for example, who enjoy
the process of writing a poem or a book, and some gardeners may
enjoy the process of growing the desired vegetables. However, it
is probably the case that Pollyannaism and the other psychological
features cause more people either to think that they desire the
process or not to mind having the desire unfulfilled during
it. Notwithstanding these psychological features, not everybody
desires the process of fulfilling a desire. Some writers may loathe
the creative process and enjoy only having produced a poem or a
book. Some gardeners may hate gardening but do it only in order
to be able to eat. Moreover, there are some desires the striving to
which nobody could (reasonably) desire. Consider, for example, the
process of fighting cancer. One wants to be cured of cancer but
who actually wants to fight the battle, enduring the treatment and
side-effects, and not knowing, along the way, whether it will be
successful?
It is often more plausible to say that the value of not having
desires fulfilled immediately is that the period of deprivation and
the process of working towards fulfilment enhances the satisfaction when the desire is eventually fulfilled. We enjoy food more
when we eat while hungry than we do when we eat while satiated.
 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?

Winning a race is a greater satisfaction when one has trained hard.
One feels more satisfied to attain the goal of playing a complicated
piece of music if one has had to work long hours to master it.
Again it is noteworthy that this cannot be said of all desires. But
even among those desires of which it is true, for at least some of
them it would be better, all things considered, if no striving were
necessary. Freedom may be valued more if it were long desired or
the result of a protracted struggle, but it would still be better not
to have been deprived of freedom all that time. Long incarceration
followed by freedom simply is not better than lifelong freedom. In
other words, we must not mistakenly think that the redeeming features of deprivation and striving are actually advantages over more
rapid desire fulfilment.
It might be thought that this applies to relatively few desires, but
whatever may be true of the actual world, we can imagine a world
in which we were differently constituted such that a period of deprivation and striving were unnecessary. Some people say that they
cannot imagine such a world, but this is simply a failure of imagination. For example, as we are currently constituted, being hungry
for a few hours enhances a meal. We can imagine beings that must
be hungry for days in order to attain the same effect. Surely they
are worse off than we are because their desires must remain unsatisfied for longer before they can gain the same satisfaction. But we
are similarly worse off than we would be if we did not have to get
as hungry as we do have to get in order to attain the same level of
satisfaction from a meal. In other words, to show that we require
the period of deprivation and striving to gain the most from the
eventual fulfilment of the desire is not to show that our lives are
better for that deprivation and striving. Instead it is to concede an
unfortunate fact about our lives. It simply would be better if desire
fulfilment required less unfulfilment along the way.
So far I have discussed how much unfulfilment characterizes life.
I turn now to show that people overestimate the significance of
that fulfilment that does exist. In other words, if we understand
How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

why our desires are fulfilled to the extent they are, we are left with
a still grimmer picture.
On desire-fulfilment views, our lives go well to the extent that
our desires are satisfied. However, the state of having one’s desires
fulfilled can be attained in one of two ways:
(a) having fulfilled whatever desires one has, or
(b) having only those desires that will be fulfilled.³⁸
A crude desire-fulfilment view will not distinguish between these
two ways of having one’s desires fulfilled. The problem with such
a crude view is that a terrible life could be transformed into a splendid one by expunging desires or by altering what one desires. If, for
instance, one came to desire the various features of one’s doleful
existence, one’s life would thereby transmute from the miserable
to the magnificent. This is hard to swallow. It might seem (or feel)
as though one’s life had so improved, but it surely would not actually have been so transformed (even though it would actually have
improved in a more limited way by feeling better).
The question is whether a more plausible version of a desirefulfilment view can be constructed—one that judges a life to go
better when desire-fulfilment is attained via (a) rather than (b). As
this is a problem internal to desire-fulfilment theory, I shall not
pursue this question. Suffice it to say that if such a version of the
desire-fulfilment view cannot be formulated, then so much the
worse for the desire-fulfilment view. But what if such a version
could be constructed? We would then need to notice that because
of the psychological phenomena I have outlined, (b) would account
for much of our desire-fulfilment. Our desires are formulated and
shaped in response to the limits of our situation. Therefore, our
lives are much worse than they would be if our desire-fulfilment
were exclusively (or even primarily) attributable to (a).
³⁸ Alternatively, the distinction might be expressed negatively by noting that
there are two ways of not having one’s desires frustrated: a) not having frustrated
whatever desires one has; or b) not having desires (that will be frustrated).

 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?

There are those, such as Buddhists and Stoics, who believe that
expunging or altering desires is exactly what we should be doing.³⁹
Believing this, however, is different from believing that (b) is
preferable to (a). Indeed, recommending (b) is most reasonable as
a response to the impossibility of (a).⁴⁰ In other words, (a) would be
better and we must resort to (b) only because we cannot have (a).
Acknowledging this does not undermine the view that our lives are
much worse under (b) than they would be under (a).

Objective list theories
The discussions of hedonistic and desire-fulfilment views apply also
to objective list views. Pleasurable mental states and the absence of
painful ones must be on the list of objective goods. Similarly, the
list of objective goods must include the fulfilment of some desires.
Moreover, just as our desires adapt to our circumstances and are
formulated by comparing ourselves with others, so objective lists
of life’s goods are constructed in a way that makes it possible for
at least some people to be said to flourish. That is to say, ‘objective lists’ of goods are not constructed sub specie aeternitatis—from
a truly objective perspective. Instead they are constructed sub specie
humanitatis—from a human perspective. Unlike desires, which can
vary from individual to individual, objective lists tend to apply to
all people, or at least to whole classes or groups of people. They are
taken to be objective only in the sense that they do not vary from
³⁹ The highest state of being, on the Buddhist view, is nirvana, a state in which all
desire and (thus) all earthly suffering has been expunged. Whereas Buddhists think
that this state can be attained during life, Arthur Schopenhauer would deny this,
and I would agree with him. However, Buddhists do think that attaining the state of
nirvana enables one to escape the cycle of reincarnation. In this sense the Buddhist
view comes closer to the Schopenhauerian view—the end of desiring is connected
with the end of (embodied) life.
⁴⁰ This is not to deny that it is preferable to expunge some desires—on moral or
aesthetic grounds, perhaps. In these cases, however, the reason for expunging the
desire is not that it cannot be fulfilled but that it would be inappropriate to fulfil it.

How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

person to person. They are not taken to be objective in the sense of
judging what a good life is sub specie aeternitatis.
Constructing lists sub specie humanitatis would be reasonable if
one wanted to determine how well a particular life goes in comparison with other (human) lives. But knowing how well a particular
life goes in comparison with other lives tells us very little about
the baseline—how good human life is. If one’s aim is to determine how good human life is, then the human perspective, given
the psychological phenomena mentioned earlier, is manifestly an
unreliable perspective from which to decide on what should be on
the list of goods. From the human perspective, what we take to be
worthwhile is very much determined by the limits of what we can
expect.
For instance, since none of us lives until age , people tend not
to think that failing to reach that age makes one’s life go less well.
However, most people regard it as tragic when somebody dies
at forty (at least if that person’s quality of life was comparatively
good). But why should a death at ninety not be tragic if a death at
forty is? The only answer can be that our judgement is constrained
by our circumstances. We do not take that which is beyond our
reach as something that would be a crucial good. But why must
it be that the good life is within our reach? Perhaps the good life is
something that is impossible to attain. It certainly sounds as though
a life that is devoid of any discomfort, pain, suffering, distress,
stress, anxiety, frustration, and boredom, that lasts for much longer
than ninety years, and that is filled with much more of what is
good would be better than the sort of life the luckiest humans have.
Why then do we not judge our lives in terms of that (impossible)
standard?
Or consider the meaning of life. A very plausible candidate for
the list of objective goods is a life’s having meaning. A meaningless
life would be lacking an important good, even if it had other
goods. Many people do think, even if only occasionally, that all
lives lack meaning. They look at life sub specie aeternitatis and see
 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?

no point to it. Conscious life, although but a blip on the radar of
cosmic time, is laden with suffering—suffering that is directed to
no end other than its own perpetuation. Most people, however,
find the idea of life’s meaninglessness intolerable and suggest that
our lives are meaningful. Many (but not all) of these resort to a
different perspective—that of humanity or that of an individual
person—from which at least some lives can be meaningful. A
life devoted to the service of humanity, for example, can be
meaningful, sub specie humanitatis, even if, from the perspective
of the universe, it is not. Other lives, though, such as that of the
man who devotes his life to counting the number of blades of grass
on different lawns,⁴¹ would lack meaning sub specie humanitatis.
The grass-counter’s life could be meaningful, however, from his
own subjective perspective, if he derived satisfaction from his
unusual life’s project. That his life could be meaningful from
this perspective leads many people to think that the subjective
perspective is unsatisfactory. But why should we think that the
perspective of humanity is any more reliable than the perspective
of the individual? From the perspective of the universe, the lives
of both the philanthropist and the grass-counter are meaningless
(which is not to say that philanthropy is not better than grass
counting).
Some argue that it does not matter that our lives are meaningless from the perspective of the universe. Even if that were true,
it would surely be much better if our lives had meaning independently of our own human perspective—if they mattered from the
perspective of the universe. Thus, at the very least, we should see
that our lives are much less good for not mattering from that perspective. Add to this the recognition of Pollyannaism and the other
distorting psychological phenomena, and we have good reason for
thinking that we may be overestimating how good our lives are
by having meaning only from the perspective of humanity. It may
⁴¹ The example is John Rawls’s.

How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

very well be that an important kind of meaning is impossible and
that our lives are lacking an important good.
Against my argument that human lives are seriously wanting
when judged sub specie aeternitatis, two objections may be raised.
The first comes from those who say that they simply cannot imagine this perspective and thus cannot judge human lives from it.
For example, they cannot imagine what a much longer life devoid
of pain and frustration, and characterized by much greater wisdom,
knowledge, and understanding would be like. This objection can
be met in the same way that I met a similar objection to my comments on life’s quality under the desire-fulfilment view. That is,
I reject it as a failure of imagination. Perhaps we are not able to
imagine, for example, exactly what it would feel like to be much
more cognitively sophisticated than humans are. Nevertheless we
can draw on our understanding of the differences between children and adults, and between animals and humans, to understand
what kind of difference increased cognitive capacity would make.
In this particular case there is room for debate about whether it
would make our lives better. Whether it would depends in part on
whether one thinks that our cognitive edge makes our lives better
than cognitively less sophisticated animals. Humans are inclined to
answer the latter question affirmatively, but that is not obviously
the right answer. Understanding carries many costs. If one thinks
that our extra cognition nonetheless makes our lives richer or better than those of non-human primates, we must concede that it
would be still better if we were better equipped cognitively. That
is unless we can show that we have the ideal degree of cognitive
ability, which sounds suspiciously self-serving. If, by contrast, we
think that we are worse off than non-human primates on account
of our heightened cognitive abilities, then this is a further way in
which our lives are worse than they could be.
There is a second, more compelling objection to my argument.
This is the objection that judgements of quality of life must be
context specific. A suitable analogy is that of a teacher marking a
 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?

student’s essay or exam.⁴² What standard does the teacher set?
If the pupils are twelve years old, the teacher must surely set
the standard at a level suitable to twelve-year olds (and perhaps,
more specifically, to those twelve-year olds). A twelve-year old’s
academic performance cannot be judged by standards suitable for
postgraduate university students. Similarly, the objection goes, we
must judge the quality of a human life by human standards and not
sub specie aeternitatis.
Clearly, I do not deny that the work of twelve-year olds should
be judged by standards suitable to their age. This is because in
judging the work of a twelve-year old, we want to know how he or
she compares with others in the same class. There are analogous
purposes in sometimes adopting a human standard for judging
the quality of human lives. We might want to know how well
one human’s life goes relative to the lives of other humans. Such
comparisons have their value, but they are not the only way of
making assessments.
To this it might be replied that just as we never then switch to
a higher standard when assessing a twelve-year old child’s work,
we should never switch to a supra-human perspective to judge the
quality of a human life. But there are a number of problems with
this reply. For instance, we are never in danger of thinking that
simply because a twelve-year old gets an ‘A’ by standards suitable
for twelve-year olds that that child should be offered a chair of
Physics at a prestigious university. That is to say, we have a clear
understanding that the standard we are using is one suited to a
twelve-year old, but that there are clear limits on that child’s level
of understanding. Yet people do regularly think that because some
people’s lives go well by human standards that they go as well as
one could imagine.
At this point my interlocutor might offer the rejoinder that just
as we never judge Physics professors by supra-human standards
⁴² I am grateful to Andy Altman for this objection and analogy.

How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

of intellect, so we should not judge the best human lives by
supra-human standards of quality. The problem, though, is that
we sometimes do and should judge the brightest people by
supra-human standards. This becomes evident if we consider
the philosophical problem of modesty (about one’s attributes or
achievements). This problem is that it is hard to explain what
modesty is without undermining the case for its being understood
as a virtue. If, for example, the modest person is understood as
one who does not recognize that he has some superlative attribute,
then modesty is an epistemic shortcoming and it is hard to see
that as a virtue. If the modest person is one who knows how good
he is but acts as though he does not, then modesty is a form of
deception, which is an implausible candidate for a virtue. The best
solution to the problem of modesty is to say that although the
modest person has an accurate perception of his strengths, he also
recognizes that there is a higher standard by which he falls short.⁴³
His ability to see himself sub specie aeternitatis puts his attributes
and achievements in a perspective that makes him modest. It is this
that we take to be a virtue.
I am recommending a more ‘modest’ view of the quality of the
best human lives. I grant that it may sometimes be appropriate—
when one is discussing distributive justice, for example—to compare the quality of some human lives with others. On other occasions, however, it is more appropriate to assess human lives sub
specie aeternitatis. That is just the case when we wish to determine
how good human life in general is. The quality of human life is
then found wanting.

⁴³ This view is advanced by Richards, Norvin, ‘Is Humility a Virtue?’, American
Philosophical Quarterly, / () –. Professor Richards does not suggest, as I shall
now do, that the higher standard is the perspective of the universe. However, that
standard makes the explanation of modesty most plausible—for otherwise modesty
would be impossible for those who are literally the best humans in some area.

 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?

Concluding comments about the three views
All three views I have examined—the hedonistic view, the desirefulfilment view and the objective list view—all allow a distinction
between
a) how good a person’s life actually is, and
b) how good it is thought to be.
Some people have a difficulty in seeing how this distinction is
possible under the hedonistic view. They think that because a hedonistic view is about subjective mental states a person’s subjective assessment of his quality of life must be reliable. However, the
hedonistic view says that life is better or worse to the extent that it
is actually characterized by positive or negative mental states. Since
people can be mistaken about that, the hedonistic view does indeed
allow the distinction between (a) and (b).
This is not to deny that (a) and (b) interact. If one’s life is very
bad, on any one of the three views, and one thinks that it is not,
then in this one way it is actually better than it would be if one realized how bad it actually was. But to say that it is better in this way
is neither to say that it is better in every way, nor is it to say that it
is so much better that it is as good as one thinks it is.
I have argued that the quality of people’s lives is much worse
than they think, and I have shown how an understanding of
human psychology can explain why people think that their lives
are better than they really are. With a more accurate picture of
the quality of an ordinary human life, we are in a better position
to determine whether starting such a life is indecent, given that
starting a new life can never benefit the person whose life is
begun. Questions of decency and indecency are notoriously hard
to answer, of course. However, if we employ a quite reasonable
test, we find that it must indeed be indecent to start lives that are
filled with as much harm as characterizes ordinary human lives.

How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

The test is this: ask whether the amount of harm in a life could
decently be inflicted on an already existent being, but neither to
advance that being’s overall interests nor for utilitarian purposes.
The first condition—excluding that person’s own interests—is
obviously crucial given the argument that coming into existence
can never be a benefit to the person who comes into existence.
The second condition may be thought to be more controversial.
However, it should not be. I have already argued that the most
plausible versions of utilitarianism do not favour the creation of
new people.⁴⁴ Creating new people does bring benefits to people
other than the person created, but these are modest benefits to
other individuals (to be discussed in Chapter ) rather than the
maximizing benefits of utilitarianism.
I have not argued, nor need I have argued, that all lives are
so bad that they are not worth continuing. I have argued instead
that all lives contain substantial amounts of whatever is thought
bad. As I argued earlier in this chapter, determining the quality of
a person’s life is not simply a matter of determining how much
good and bad there is in a life. Nevertheless, if a life contains more
bad than one thinks, one’s assessment of that life’s quality cannot
become more favourable. My arguments in Chapter  showed that
even lesser quantities of bad could not be outweighed by whatever
limited good a life may contain.

A WO R L D O F S U F F E R I N G
Such is the strength of Pollyannaism, that the foregoing sort of pessimism is often dismissed as the self-pitying whinging of existential
weaklings. Optimists make valiant attempts to paint a rosy picture,
to put a redeeming positive gloss on the human predicament, or at
⁴⁴ In Chapter  I shall consider the question whether any theoretical approach
could permit temporary and highly limited baby-making as a means to phased
extinction.

 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?

least to show a brave face. Pessimists find these unseemly—akin
to jocularity or cheering at a funeral. Arthur Schopenhauer, for
example, says of optimism that ‘where it is not merely the thoughtless talk of those who harbour nothing but words under their
shallow foreheads, seems to. . .be not merely an absurd, but also a
really wicked, way of thinking, a bitter mockery of the unspeakable
suffering of mankind’.⁴⁵
Whether or not one accepts the pessimistic view I have presented of ordinary healthy life, the optimist is surely on very weak
ground when one considers the amount of unequivocal suffering
the world contains.⁴⁶ (I shall focus here only on human suffering, but
the picture becomes still more obscene when we consider the suffering of the trillions of animals who share our planet—including
the billions who are brought into existence each year, only to be
maltreated and killed for human consumption or other use.)
Consider first, natural disasters. More than fifteen million people
are thought to have died from such disasters in the last ,
years.⁴⁷ In the last few years, flooding, for example, has killed
an estimated , annually and brought suffering to ‘tens of
millions’.⁴⁸ The number is greater in some years. In late December
, a few hundred thousand people lost their lives in a tsunami.
Approximately , people die every day from hunger.⁴⁹ An
estimated  million people suffer from hunger and malnutrition

⁴⁵ Schopenhauer, Arthur, The World as Will and Representation, .
⁴⁶ Arthur Schopenhauer says:
If we were to conduct the most hardened and callous optimist through hospitals,
infirmaries, operating theatres, through prisons, torture-chambers, and slave hovels,
over battlefields and to places of execution; if we were to open to him all the dark
abodes of misery, where it shuns the gaze of cold curiosity, and finally were to allow
him to glance into the dungeon of Ugolino where prisoners starved to death, he too
would certainly see in the end what kind of a world is this milleur des mondes possibles
[best of all possible worlds]. Ibid. .
⁴⁷ McGuire, Bill, A Guide to the End of the World (New York: Oxford University
Press, ) .
⁴⁸ Ibid. .
⁴⁹ The Hunger Project:<http://www.thp.org>(accessed November ).

How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

without dying from it.⁵⁰ That is a sizeable proportion of the approximately . billion people who currently live.
Disease ravages and kills millions annually. Consider plague, for
example. Between  ce and , it is estimated that over 
million people succumbed to plague.⁵¹ Remember that the human
population during this period was just a fraction of its current size.
The  influenza epidemic killed  million people. Given the size
of the current world human population and the increased speed
and volume of global travel, a new influenza epidemic could cause
millions more deaths. HIV currently kills nearly  million people
annually.⁵² If we add all other infectious diseases, we get a total of
nearly  million deaths per year,⁵³ preceded by considerable suffering. Malignant neoplasms take more than a further  million lives
each year,⁵⁴ usually after considerable and often protracted suffering. Add the approximately . million accidental deaths (including
over a million road accident deaths a year).⁵⁵ When all other deaths
are added, a colossal sum of approximately . million people died
in .⁵⁶ That is more than  people per minute. As the world
human population grows the number of deaths increases. In some
parts of the world, where infant mortality is high, many of these
deaths will follow within a few years of birth. However, even when
life expectancy is greater, we know that more birth leads to more
death. Now multiply the number of deaths by the number of family
and friends who survive to mourn and miss the departed. For every
death there are many more bereft who grieve for the deceased.
Although much disease is attributable to human behaviour, consider the more intentionally caused suffering that some members
⁵⁰ ‘Undernourishment Around the World’,<http://www.fao/org/DOCREP/
/yE/ye.htm>(accessed  November )
⁵¹ Rummel, R. J., Death by Government (New Brunswick, Transaction Publishers,
) .
⁵² World Health Organization, The World Health Report  (Geneva: WHO,
) . The number for  was ,,.
⁵³ Ibid. .
⁵⁴ Ibid. .
⁵⁵ These are  statistics. The World Health Report , .
⁵⁶ Ibid. 

 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?

of our species inflict on others. One authority estimates that
before the twentieth century over  million people were killed
in mass killings.⁵⁷ According to this same author, the first 
years of the twentieth century saw  million (and possibly
as many as  million) people ‘shot, beaten, tortured, knifed,
burned, starved, frozen, crushed, or worked to death; buried alive,
drowned,. . .[hanged], bombed, or killed in any other of the myriad
ways governments have inflicted death on unarmed, helpless citizens and foreigners’.⁵⁸
Millions of people, obviously, are killed during wars. According
to the World Report on Violence and Health, there were . million
conflict-related deaths in the sixteenth century, . million in the
seventeenth century,  million in the eighteenth, . million in the
nineteenth, and . million in that most bloody of centuries—the
twentieth.⁵⁹ The World Health Organization estimates that warrelated injuries led to , deaths in ,⁶⁰ a year that does not
stand out in our minds as being particularly bloody.
Nor does the suffering end there. Consider the number of people
who are raped, assaulted, maimed, or murdered (by private citizens,
rather than governments). About  million children are maltreated
each year.⁶¹ More than  million currently living women and girls
have been subjected to genital cutting.⁶² Then there is enslavement,
unjust incarceration, shunning, betrayal, humiliation, and intimidation, not to mention oppression in its myriad forms.
For hundreds of thousands, the suffering is so great—or the
acknowledgement of it so clear—that they take their own lives.

⁵⁷ Rummel, R. J., Death by Government, . His low estimate is  million, but the
number could be as high as  million.
⁵⁸ Ibid. .
⁵⁹ Krug, Etienne G., Dahlbeg, Linda L., Mercy, James A., Zwi, Anthony B., and
Lozano, Rafael., (eds.) World Report on Violence and Health (Geneva: WHO, ) .
⁶⁰ Ibid. .
⁶¹ The World Health Report , 
⁶² Toubia, Nahid, ‘Female Circumcision as a Public Health Issue’, New England
Journal of Medicine, / () .

How Bad Is Coming into Existence? ∼ 

For instance, , people are thought to have committed suicide
in .⁶³
Pollyannaism leads most people to think that they and their
(potential) children will be spared all this. And indeed there are
some, although extremely few, who are lucky enough to avoid
non-inevitable suffering. But everybody must experience at least
some or other of the harms in the above catalogue of misery.
Even if there are some lives that are spared most of this
suffering, and those lives are better than I have said they are,
those (relatively) high-quality lives are exceedingly uncommon. A
charmed life is so rare that for every one such life there are millions
of wretched lives. Some know that their baby will be among the
unfortunate. Nobody knows, however, that their baby will be one
of the allegedly lucky few. Great suffering could await any person
that is brought into existence. Even the most privileged people
could give birth to a child that will suffer unbearably, be raped,
assaulted, or be murdered brutally. The optimist surely bears the
burden of justifying this procreational Russian roulette. Given that
there are no real advantages over never existing for those who are
brought into existence, it is hard to see how the significant risk of
serious harm could be justified. If we count not only the unusually
severe harms that anybody could endure, but also the quite routine
ones of ordinary human life, then we find that matters are still
worse for cheery procreators. It shows that they play Russian
roulette with a fully loaded gun—aimed, of course, not at their
own heads, but at those of their future offspring.
⁶³ Krug, Etienne, et al, World Report on Violence and Health, .

 ∼ How Bad Is Coming into Existence?


Having Children:
The Anti-Natal View
Philosophers. . .ought much rather to employ themselves in
rendering a few individuals happy, than in inciting the suffering species to multiply itself.
Martin in Voltaire’s Candide¹
The idea of bringing someone into this world fills me with
horror. . .May my flesh perish utterly! May I never transmit
to anyone the boredom and ignominies of existence!
Gustave Flaubert²

P RO C R E AT I O N
I have argued so far that coming into existence is always a harm,
and that it is a serious harm. There is more than one way to
reach this conclusion. Those who reject the arguments in Chapter 
that coming into existence is always a harm may nonetheless be
¹ Voltaire, Candide, (London: Penguin Books, ) –.
² Flaubert, Gustave, Letter to Louise Colet,  December , in The Letters
of Gustave Flaubert –, trans. Francis Steegmuller (London: Faber & Faber,
) .

persuaded by the arguments in Chapter  that our lives are actually
very bad. Even those who deny that all lives are very bad should
conclude from Chapter  that at least the overwhelming majority of
lives are very bad. These conclusions must certainly have bearing
on the question of having children (by which I mean the generation
of children rather than rearing them).

No duty to procreate
Some people believe that there is a duty to procreate. There are
various ways of understanding the () scope of, and () justification
for this purported duty:
() Scope: A duty to procreate can be understood as (a) a duty
to have some children, or it can be understood as (b) a duty
to have as many children as one can.
() Justification: Purported duties to procreate could be based
on (a) the interests of those brought into existence, or
(b) other considerations, such as the interests of others,
utility, divine commands, and so on.³
My arguments most powerfully challenge the duty when it is
based on the interests of those brought into existence. If coming
into existence is always a serious harm, then there can be no
duty, based on the interests of potential people, to bring some
and, a fortiori, as many as possible, of these people into existence.
For a duty to procreate that is justified in this way to have any
plausibility it must be limited to exclude cases where the only
(additional) children one could have would lead lives that are so
bad that they are not worth starting. That is to say, nobody could
plausibly suggest that one had a duty, based on the interests of
potential people, to bring some (and a fortiori as many as possible)
of them into existence if their lives were not worth starting.
³ For other grounds, see Smilansky, Saul, ‘Is There a Moral Obligation to Have
Children?, Journal of Applied Philosophy, / () –.

 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

Since my arguments show that no lives are worth starting, the
limitation excludes all lives from the scope of a duty to procreate.
My arguments show, then, either that there is no duty to procreate
or if there is such a duty that it is a purely theoretical duty that
never applies in the real world. Even those who think that there are
a few lives that were worth starting would have to abandon a duty
to procreate. This is because both (a) one cannot tell in advance
whether a life one starts will turn out to be one that was worth
starting; and (b) the costs of error are so great, given how bad all
other lives are.
My arguments pose a more indirect, but nonetheless substantial,
challenge to a duty to procreate that is based on considerations other than the interests of those brought into existence. My arguments
do not logically preclude these duties (and their having application in the real world). This is because one could acknowledge that
coming into existence is a harm, even a serious one, and yet say
that the considerations that ground the duty—such as the interests
of others or divine commands—outweigh the harm. One could say
this, but it is highly implausible if the harm of coming into existence is as severe as I have suggested. And it is more implausible
the more harm one inflicts. This is why (b) above based on (b)
is even more implausible than (a) based on (b): A duty to have
as many children as one can, based on considerations other than
the interests of those who are brought into existence, is even more
implausible than is a duty to have some children, that is based on
considerations other than the interests of those who are brought
into existence.

Is there a duty not to procreate?
Do my arguments also show that it is actually wrong to have
children? That is to say, is there a duty not to procreate, or is
procreation neither obligatory nor prohibited? Many people will
agree that there is sometimes a duty not to procreate—namely, in
Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

those cases where the child one brings into existence will have an
unusually bad life. My question, however, is whether the duty not
to bring people into existence applies to all possible people.
An affirmative answer would be sharply antagonistic to some of
the most deeply seated and powerful human drives—the reproductive ones. In evaluating whether it is wrong to have children
we must be acutely aware and suspicious of the power these drives
have to bias us in their favour. At the same time, to embrace the
view that procreation is wrong without due consideration of procreative interests would be rash.
At the outset, we must distinguish procreative interests from
coital interests and parenting interests. Procreative interests are
interests in bringing new people, one’s genetic offspring, into
existence.⁴ Non-procreation comes at the cost of frustrating
procreative interests. Not all people have such interests, but a great
many people do.
Coital interests are interests in a kind of sexual union—coitus.
The satisfaction of coital interests accounts for much procreation.
Indeed many people are brought into existence not because their
parents sought to satisfy their own procreative interests, but
because their parents were satisfying their own coital interests.
In other words, for a great number of people, their coming into
existence is not so much the result of a parental decision to
procreate, as a mere consequence of parental coitus. However,
because coitus is possible without bringing anybody into existence
(as happens, for example, when successful contraception is used),
non-procreation need not come at the cost of frustrating coital
interests (and a fortiori non-coital sexual interests). All it requires
is some (contraceptive) care by one or both of the parties, and
then only during the female’s pre-menopausal life. The additional
⁴ The phrase ‘genetic offspring’ is necessary because, for example, a fertility
doctor’s procreative interests are not fulfilled when he assists others in reproducing.
(The phrase ‘genetic offspring’ is not restricted to those beings formed from one’s
own gametes, and can also include one’s clone.)

 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

effort that that care takes cannot begin to outweigh the harm of
coming into existence, and thus we certainly cannot condone that
baby-making that is a mere consequence (rather than a goal) of
coitus.
Parenting interests are interests in rearing a child as well as
interests in the relationship established with the (adult) children
one has raised. Although these interests are usually fulfilled by
rearing a child that is one’s genetic offspring, one can rear children
one has not produced oneself. Thus, the fulfilment of parenting
interests does not always require the satisfaction of one’s own
procreative interests. At least while there are unwanted children,
people can satisfy their interests in rearing children without
producing any of their own. However, producing children of one’s
own is by far the easiest way of acquiring a child to rear. Adoption
is an arduous process with considerable costs of an emotional and
financial kind. Most of those who currently endure this process are
those who cannot produce their own genetic child, although there
are some people who elect to adopt in spite of their own fertility.
For both fertile and infertile adopters, non-procreative rearing
comes at the cost of the adoption process. If non-procreation
became the norm (which it will not voluntarily become) and there
were no unwanted children, then non-procreation would come
at the cost of frustrating not only procreative interests but also
parenting interests.
Children cannot be brought into existence for their own sakes.
We do not need the argument in Chapter  to see why this is so,
although that argument certainly shows that a person brought into
existence cannot be the beneficiary of this instance of procreation.
This is not to say that some procreators do not think that they
are having children for those children’s sakes. It is only to say that
whatever such people might think, their having children cannot
actually be for those children’s sakes. If their reasons for having
children are to bestow a benefit on those children, then they are
mistaken.
Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

People can have children for other reasons. Most people, where
they even make a decision to have a child, make that decision, I suspect, in order to serve their own procreative and related interests.
For some people, the decision may also, in part, be to serve the
interests of others. These others may include one’s own parents
(who want to become grandparents), the tribe or the nation (that
need new people in order to survive), or the state (that needs to be
adequately peopled in order to function well). However, even in
such cases, serving these other interests will usually coincide with
serving the interests of the procreators themselves. Giving one’s
parents grandchildren silences the complaints about the absence of
grandchildren. Making babies for the tribe, nation, or state earns
one some status. But it is the procreative and related interests, I suspect, that account for most of the intentional baby-making. Parents
satisfy biological desires to produce children and find fulfilment in
nurturing and raising their children. When grown these children
can become friends. They can provide grandchildren. And they are
often an insurance policy for old age, caring for one in one’s senility. Progeny provide parents with some form of immortality—
through the genetic material, values, and ideas that parents pass
on to their children, and which survive in their children and grandchildren after the parents themselves are dead. Some of these are
good reasons for people to want to have children, but none of them
show why having children is not wrong. To the extent that these
goods could be obtained without producing children of one’s own,
they cannot be used to defend baby-making. But at least some of
these goods—most obviously the procreational interests—cannot
be secured without making babies. Now the fact that procreation
serves one’s own interests is not enough to show that it is wrong.
Serving one’s own interests is not always bad. However, where
doing so inflicts significant harm on others, it is usually not
justified.
One way, then, to defend the having of children, even if one
accepts my view that coming into existence is always a harm, would
 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

be to deny that that harm is great—that is, to deny the conclusion
of Chapter . One could then argue that the harm is outweighed
by the benefits to the parents and others. But what if one agrees
that coming into existence is a great harm? Is there anything then
that could be said to defend baby-making?
In defence of the permissibility of having children, it might
be suggested that it is morally significant that most people whose
lives go relatively well do not see their having come into existence
as a harm. They do not regret having come into existence. My arguments suggest that these views may be less than rational, but that,
it might be suggested, does not rob them of all their moral significance. Because most people who live (relatively) comfortable lives
are happy to have come into existence, prospective parents of such
people are justified in assuming that if they have children they too
will feel this way. Given that it is not possible to obtain consent
from people prior to their existence to bring them into existence,
this presumption might play a key role in a justification for having children. Where we can presume that those whom we bring
into existence will not mind that we do, we are entitled, the argument might go, to give expression to our procreational and other interests. Where these interests can be met by having either a
child with a relatively good life or a child with a relatively bad life
it would be wrong if the parents brought the latter into existence,
even where that child would also not regret its existence. This is
because if the prospective parents are to satisfy their procreational interests they must do so with as little cost as possible. The less
bad the life they bring into being, the less the cost. Some costs (such
as where the offspring would lead a sub-minimally decent life)
are so great that they would always override the parents’
interests.
Those cases in which the offspring turn out to regret their existence are exceedingly tragic, but where parents cannot reasonably
foresee this, we cannot say, the argument would suggest, that they
do wrong to follow their important interests in having children.
Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

Things would be quite different, according to this argument, if the
majority or even a sizeable minority of people regretted coming
into existence. Under such circumstances the above justification for
having children certainly would be doomed. However, given that
most people do not regret their having come into existence, does the
argument work? In fact, the argument is problematic (and not only
for the reasons that Seana Shiffrin raises and which I mentioned
in Chapter ). Its form has been widely criticized in other contexts, because of its inability to rule out those harmful interferences
in people’s lives (such as indoctrination) that effect a subsequent
endorsement of the interference. Coming to endorse the views one
is indoctrinated to hold is one form of adaptive preference—where
an interference comes to be endorsed. However, there are other kinds of adaptive preference of which we are also suspicious.
Desired goods that prove unattainable can cease to be desired (‘sour
grapes’). The reverse is also true. It is not uncommon for people to
find themselves in unfortunate circumstances (being forced to feed
on lemons) and adapt their preferences to suit their predicament⁵
(‘sweet lemons’). If coming into existence is as great a harm as I
have suggested, and if that is a heavy psychological burden to bear,
then it is quite possible that we could be engaged in a mass selfdeception about how wonderful things are for us. If that is so, then
it might not matter, contrary to what is claimed by the procreative
argument just sketched, that most people do not regret their having
come into existence. Armed with a strong argument for the harmfulness of slavery, we would not take slaves’ endorsement of their
enslavement as a justification for their enslavement, particularly if
we could point to some rationally questionable psychological phenomenon that explained the slaves’ contentment.⁶ If that is so, and
if coming into existence is as great a harm as I have argued it is, then
⁵ Often, although not always, this will start out as a way to save face, but even
then it eventually can be internalized.
⁶ There is just such a phenomenon in the case of kidnap victims, who often come
to identify with their kidnappers.

 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

we should not take the widespread contentment with having come
into existence as a justification for having children.
To this it might be objected that a duty not to procreate is too
demanding a requirement. I do not deny that forgoing procreation
is a burden—that it is a lot to require of people, given their nature.
But is it too much to require? I said earlier that many people would
agree that there is sometimes a duty not to procreate—namely
in those cases where the offspring would suffer terribly. In such
cases many people are prepared to admit that it would be wrong
to have a child. But notice that the burden for those who must
desist from producing progeny in such cases is no lighter than
the burden any other potential human breeder faces in forgoing
having children. If the burden is not too great for the former, then
it ought not to be too great for the latter. Where the difference
is thought to lie is in the quality of life of the offspring. In other
words, it is thought that non-procreation is required of those
whose children’s quality of life would be unacceptably low, but
we cannot make such a demand of those whose offspring would
be ‘normal’. Notice, however, that this is not an argument about
the magnitude of the burden of non-procreation, but rather one
about when that burden may be imposed. I could accept that nonprocreation should only be required when the children produced
would lead very poor quality lives. This is because I have argued
that all lives fall into this category. Those who think that a few lives
do not fall into this category are not (much) better equipped to
defend the objection that non-procreation is too demanding. This
is because they must surely be moved by the fact that we cannot
tell, when we deliberate about whether to bring somebody into
existence, whether that life will be one of the few lives that is not
of a very poor quality. It seems, then, that those who accept that
coming into existence is a great harm and that there is a duty not
to procreate in cases where the offspring would suffer great harm
by being brought into existence must accept that a duty not to
procreate is not too demanding.
Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

If I am mistaken about this, however, and it is not immoral
to have children, my arguments in Chapters  and  show, at the
very least, that it is preferable not to have children. Although our
potential offspring may not regret coming into existence, they
certainly would not regret not coming into existence. Since it is
actually very much not in their interests to come into being, the
morally desirable course of action is to ensure that they do not.

P RO C R E AT I V E F R E E D O M
If it is merely preferable not to procreate, then there could still be
a right to procreate. That is to say, one could be entitled—have a
right—to do that which is sub-optimal.⁷ However, if there is a duty
not to procreate, then it seems that there can be no right to procreate. One cannot be entitled to do that which one has a duty not
to do. Thus the argument that there is a duty not to produce children appears to threaten a commonly ascribed right to procreative
freedom.⁸ Is this really so?

Understanding the purported right
I shall understand a right to procreative freedom to be a right to
choose whether or not to produce children. One aspect of this
right—namely, the right not to produce children—clearly does
not conflict with a duty not to procreate. If the right to procreative
⁷ Maximizers, who collapse the distinctions between ‘permissible’, ‘required’, and
‘supererogatory’, would deny that we are ever entitled to do that which is suboptimal. Thus, when I say that one could be entitled to do that which is sub-optimal
I mean that one could do so by rejecting a maximizing view.
⁸ Article  of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights ()
says that ‘men and women of full age. . .have the right to marry and found a family.’
A right to ‘found a family’ is also ascribed by the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (Article ) and the European Convention on Human Rights
(Article ). Taken literally, the right to ‘found a family’ is not unambiguously a right
to procreate, for it is also possible to found a family by adoption, but it is clearly
intended and understood that the right includes the procreative founding of a family.

 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

freedom were understood to include only this aspect, then the
right as a whole would not conflict with a duty not to have
children. The conflict only arises when the right is both a right to
make and a right not to make babies.
Moreover, I shall understand a right to procreative freedom to
be a negative right—that is, a right not to be prevented from reproducing (with a willing partner) or not reproducing. In other words,
I shall not understand it as a positive right to be assisted in having
children or in avoiding having children. The question of assisted
reproduction will be considered later in this chapter.
The conflict between a duty not to procreate and a purported
right to procreate is starkest, and unavoidable, where the right
in question is a moral right (assuming, as I do, that the duty not
to procreate is a moral duty). If having children is morally wrong
and there is therefore a moral duty not to have children, then there
can be no moral right to have children. However, this leaves open
the question whether there should be a legal right to have children.
Having children may be morally wrong, but it may still be the case
that there ought to be a legal right to do this wrong. One of the
distinctive features of a legal right is that it allows somebody
the liberty to do what may be, or regarded to be, wrong. A legal right to freedom of speech, for example, exists not to protect
speech that everybody takes to be good and wise, but rather to protect speech that at least some take to be evil or stupid. One can
think that somebody ought to have a legal right to say and do
things that one personally regards as wrong. This fact, however, is
insufficient by itself to show that there should be a legal right to
procreative freedom. This is because there are many wrongs that
there ought not to be a right to perform. For example, there ought
not to be a legal right to murder, steal, or assault. The question,
then, is whether or not bringing people into existence is the sort of
wrong that should be legally protected. It is to that question that I
now turn.

Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

Grounding the right on autonomy
Clearly a right to produce children cannot be derived from a right not
to produce children. One could have a right not to produce children
without having a right to produce children. A purported right to
procreate might, however, be based partially on considerations that
also ground a right not to procreate. For instance, one might argue
that an interest in one’s autonomy might establish a presumption
against interference with procreative choices. This argument can
be bolstered by noting how important procreative decisions are
for so many people. Procreative liberty tends to be highly valued,
either in itself or as a means to parenting. Whether or not one
reproduces can have a profound impact on the character and quality
of one’s life (although, pregnancy aside, it need not if one gives up
for adoption children one produces, or if one adopts children one
has not produced). It can affect one’s sense of self. (For example,
some people feel inadequate if they are unable to produce children
of their genetic own.) Producing children can give meaning to some
people’s lives or have religious significance for them.
It is widely thought that these considerations are sufficient to
justify a legal right to have children. However, those who think
that there ought to be a legal right to have children but also accept
the conclusion that it is always a harm to come into existence
face the following difficulty. A legal right to have children is not
an absolute entitlement but instead a very strong presumption in
favour of having children. It is in the nature of a presumption that
it can be defeated. Thus one defender of a right to procreative
freedom notes that ‘those who would limit procreative choice have
the burden of showing that the reproductive actions at issue would
create such substantial harm that they could justifiably be limited.’⁹
⁹ Robertson, John, Children of Choice (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
) .

 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

This is not very controversial. However, if one thinks that coming
into existence is always a great harm, then the presumption in
favour of a right to procreate is always defeated. But a right that
is always defeated is not really a right. Although it might still be
argued that it is a right in principle—a presumption that has to be
defeated, even though it always is defeated—such rights are not
suitably enshrined in law. To make the case that people ought to
have a legal right to have children, one must surely demonstrate
that there should be a presumption in practice, and not merely
in principle, to choose whether to have children. The problem,
then, is that a defeasible legal right to have children is not a
plausible candidate for a legal right if the defeasibility conditions
are always met.

Grounding the right on futility
One way in which a legal right to reproductive freedom might
be defended without denying that coming into existence is always
a harm would be to argue as follows. If a right to reproductive
freedom were withheld in order to prevent harm to those who
would be brought into existence, the state could then either simply
let people exercise reproductive choices without having a right to
do so, or it could actively prohibit reproduction. The first option
would be pointless. If the point of withholding an entitlement
to have children is to prevent the harm of bringing people into
existence, why withhold an entitlement to have children only
then to permit people to have children? Withholding the right
would have to be linked, therefore, to a prohibition on having
children.¹⁰ However the argument in defence of a legal right to
¹⁰ It is not lost on me that this will never be seriously considered by any state, at
least with regard to all people within its borders. (There have clearly been states that
have sought to restrict, prevent or prohibit the reproduction of undesired subsets
of the population—blacks, Jews, ‘imbeciles’, and the lower classes, for example.)
That no state would ever ask whether it should prohibit procreation by everybody

Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

reproductive freedom might go, procreative prohibition simply
would not work. People would find ways of breaking the law. To
enforce the law, even partially and unevenly, the state would have
to engage in highly intrusive policing and the invasions of privacy
that that would entail. On the plausible assumption that coitus
itself should not and cannot effectively be prohibited, the state
would have to be able to distinguish between those, on the one
hand, who conceived wittingly or negligently, and those, on the
other hand, who conceived accidentally. In either case, the state
would then have to require abortions. In the case of the unwilling,
this would require physically restraining people and performing
unwanted abortions on them. The threat of this would very
likely drive pregnancy underground, with women gestating and
giving birth on the quiet. This, in turn, would very likely increase
pregnancy- and parturition-related morbidity and mortality. These
sorts of moral costs are immense and there is a powerful case to
be made for the view that they are not outweighed by the benefits.
This is particularly so given that the full benefits are unlikely to be
obtained, given that much procreation would not be prevented by
a prohibition on producing children. The case would be strongest
on a non-maximizing non-consequentialist view—the sort of view
most friendly to rights—but it may also be true of maximizing
consequentialist views, depending on just how much benefit and
harm would be produced under each scenario.

Grounding the right on disagreement
In our world this argument seems sufficient to justify a legal right
to procreative freedom and its constituent legal right to produce
children. However, there is one further objection that needs to be
does not mean, however, that it is not a question worth asking. There may be all
kinds of psychological, sociological, and political explanations for why procreation
will never be universally prohibited in a state. It does not follow that this position is
philosophically sound.

 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

considered and met. We can certainly imagine a society in which
non-procreation could be widely (even if not universally) ensured
without the invasions of privacy and bodily intrusions described
above. This would be so if a safe, highly effective contraceptive
substance could be widely administered without the knowledge
of the population or the consent of individual people—in the
drinking water, for example, or by aerial spray. A state in which
this were done would avoid the horrendous image of Orwellian
surveillance, or forced sterilizations and abortions, and so on. Of
course, it would still be violating personal autonomy, but this, we
have already seen, is not sufficient to make the case for a legal right
to produce children.
Can anything be said in defence of a right to reproductive
freedom in a society in which procreation could be prevented in
such unobtrusive and gentle ways? The strongest argument of
which I can think, although not one without serious difficulties,
is as follows. The view that coming into existence is always a
harm is highly contested. Even if this view is nonetheless correct,
the mere fact that it enjoys so little support shows that ordinary
people can disagree about this. And where such disagreement
exists about whether some action is (unjustifiably) harmful, the
state should grant people the right to choose whether or not to
engage in such actions. This argument suggests a qualification
of the famous harm principle. According to this principle, in its
unqualified form, states may prohibit activities only when they
harm non-consenting parties. The qualification states that cases
in which there is disagreement between ordinary people about
whether some action is harmful do not fall within the scope of the
principle.
There are some cases that seem to lend support to this view.
Some might think that abortion is one such case. Pro-lifers, it might
be said, believe that abortion unjustifiably harms the fetus and
therefore should be prohibited under the harm principle. Some,
but not all, pro-choicers might note that it is highly contested
Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

whether fetuses are morally considerable. Given this, they might
argue, there ought to be a legal right to have an abortion even if it
is the case that abortion is morally wrong.
However, there are other cases that call into serious question
the proposed qualification to the harm principle. Consider the case
of slavery in a slave-owning society—or at least that sort of slaveowning society where slavery is defended by a view that slaves
are naturally suited to being slaves. In such a society we find
large numbers of people who believe that slavery does not harm
slaves. Indeed they might even believe that slavery benefits slaves.
They might listen to the arguments of a few abolitionists that
slavery is harmful to slaves, and reply that their claims are highly
contested and thus exempted from the harm principle. Although
that conclusion would be accepted readily by slavery’s defenders,
it is quite clear that neither the abolitionists in that society nor
we who have the benefit of some temporal or geographic distance
from slavery would be impressed by this argument. Surely there
ought not to be a legal right to own slaves even when slavery’s
harmfulness is contested? This shows that the mere fact that an
activity’s status as harmful is contested does not show that the
harm principle is inapplicable or that people should have a legal
right to engage in it.

Grounding the right on reasonable disagreement
If the argument qualifying the application of the harm principle
is to succeed, it must draw a distinction between whether an
activity’s status as harmful is reasonably contested and whether
it is contested simpliciter. The mere fact of disagreement, even
between ordinary people, is now not enough to restrict the harm
principle. It must be shown that the disagreement is reasonable.
But what is the mark of a reasonable disagreement? It cannot be
reduced to the numbers of people holding differing views, for
we have already seen how wrong even a majority of people can
 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

be in determining whether some action is sufficiently harmful
to withhold a right to engage in it. Reasonable disagreement is
thus not disagreement between ordinary people—people on the
famous ‘Clapham omnibus’. For a disagreement to be reasonable
the reasons for one view on a matter must not be sufficiently
stronger than reasons for conflicting views that accepting one of
the conflicting views is actually (rather than merely perceived
to be) unreasonable. Now the problem with this standard is
that of differentiating between disagreements that are actually
unreasonable and those that are only perceived to be so.
To see why this is so, consider the following. I think that there
can be no reasonable disagreement about the harmfulness of chattel
slavery, but many people in societies where such slavery is and was
practised do not agree. I should like to think that their proximity to
slavery clouds or clouded their judgement about its harmfulness,
and that my perception is thus less distorted. Of course, proximity
to a social norm does not always blind people. There were and are
abolitionists in slave-owning societies. And many (but not enough)
of us who were born and grew up in Apartheid South Africa but
were not its direct victims did not think that there could be reasonable disagreement about the wrong of apartheid’s racism. We saw
our opponents, the defenders of apartheid, as manifestly unreasonable, blinded though they were to this. Consider, next, a currently
more controversial case. I do not think that there can be reasonable
disagreement that the cruel treatment inflicted on the billions of
animals that are reared and killed for human consumption is wrong.
I have carefully considered the philosophical arguments to the contrary and they have all the attributes of earlier desperate defences
of racism. Clearly, however, those philosophers and others who
defend the eating of meat do not agree with me. We have different
perceptions about whether the disagreement is reasonable. How
do we determine whether it is actually reasonable?
The foregoing is not to say that I take all those who disagree
with me about anything to be unreasonable. Most pertinently, I
Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

cannot say, notwithstanding all my arguments, that those who
deny that coming into existence is always a serious harm are
unreasonable. I do think that they are wrong. However, until my
position has been adequately tested against the very best objections
one cannot assess whether my claim is one about which reasonable
people can disagree or one with which it is unreasonable to
disagree (or, for that matter, to agree!).
I have shown that a legal right to reproductive freedom is
well justified in our actual world where the alternative involves
appalling state invasions of privacy and bodily intrusions. My
liberal instincts are troubled by the case of a society where
all (or almost all) procreation could be prevented without such
costs by involuntary and imperceptible contraception.¹¹ In such a
case, the best defence of a right to reproductive freedom is the
claim that there can be reasonable disagreement about whether
coming into existence is a serious harm. If it turns out that there
cannot be reasonable disagreement with the view that coming into
existence is always seriously harmful, a legal right to procreative
freedom would have to be questioned further. Those suspicious
of state interference with personal freedom will be perturbed
by this. The only solace in this case is that it is highly unlikely
that liberal governments will rush into banning all procreation
without more than overwhelming evidence in favour of such a
ban. Governments will be so heavily disincentivized to prohibit
all procreation,¹² unlike many other restrictions of an individual’s
freedom, that it is highly unlikely that a generalized prohibition
will ever be implemented. It is even less likely that governments
will rush prematurely into such a prohibition. It is much more
likely that they will retain a right to procreate long after the
¹¹ I also have strong instincts that allowing people to cause suffering is wrong.
These instincts pull in the opposite direction.
¹² As I mentioned in note  above, this generalized prohibition on procreation is
to be distinguished from a prohibition on the procreation of undesired groups. But
the latter kind of prohibition can be ruled out on other grounds, such as equality.

 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

reasonableness of such a position has vanished (if it does indeed
vanish). That delay in abandoning a legal right to procreate may
be regrettable, but may be less regrettable than the alternative of
prematurely abandoning such a right.
There is then, for now, a strong case for recognizing a legal right to
reproductive freedom. I can envisage circumstances in which this
case would crumble, but on account of the strong biases toward
rejecting the view that coming into existence is a harm, the case
would be in utter ruins before a rights-respecting state withdrew a
legal right to reproduce. If matters were that clear, the loss of such
a right would not be regrettable. Indeed, the loss of such a right
in liberal societies will cease to be regrettable long before it ever is
lost—if it is ever lost in a society that remains liberal. In the interim,
we can defend a legal right to produce children even while thinking
that there is a moral duty not to bring new people into existence.
That a legal right to reproductive freedom can be defended, at
least for the moment, does not entail that it must retain its current parameters and weight. It is curious just how extensive and
strong this right currently is in many jurisdictions. Causing or risking harm is often countenanced in the reproductive context to an
extent that it would not be tolerated in any other context. Consider,
for example, somebody who is either a carrier of or a sufferer from
a serious genetic disease (such as Tay-Sachs or Huntington’s) or an
infectious disease (such as AIDS). Under at least some circumstances
(or, for Huntington’s, in all circumstances), this person’s offspring
stand a very high chance of being affected—twenty-five or fifty per
cent in the case of genetic disorders and somewhere in between for
infectious diseases such as AIDS. Whereas many societies ordinarily
would not tolerate behaviour that put others at such risk of so serious a harm, there is often considerable tolerance of reproductive
conduct that poses this kind of risk and harm.
Sometimes, as I indicated earlier, there is good reason for this.
This is true, for example, when we cannot determine a person’s
culpability, at least without troubling invasions of privacy. Did he
Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

know that he was a carrier of the genetic disorder? Did she know
that she was HIV positive? Did they employ reasonable contraceptive measures? These sorts of uncertainties often make it difficult to
attach blame, let alone criminal sanctions, to irresponsible reproductive conduct. Unless one is willing to apply strict liability there
would be similar problems with civil action. However, the tolerance for and even defence of risky and harmful reproductive behaviour extends further than this. It is thought to be wrong to prohibit, prevent, impede, or sometimes even discourage clearly culpable
harmful reproduction even when we could do so without invasions
of privacy.
Since there is no intrinsic reason why we should treat harm
caused by reproduction any differently from comparable harm
caused in other ways, we should be prepared to reconceive
the limits of reproductive liberty. Given the bias in favour of
reproductive freedom, it may help when considering whether any
given risky reproductive practice should be protected by a right to
reproductive freedom to ask ourselves whether we would think
that taking that risk of that harm should be permitted in nonreproductive contexts. If we would not think that this should
be permitted, then we should not judge it to be acceptable in
reproductive contexts either.
No less a champion of liberty than John Stuart Mill argued
that there should be some restrictions on the right to reproduce.
He wrote about those people who produce children they cannot
feed, but his arguments have more general application. He
condemns the abundant number of ‘writers and public speakers,
including many of most ostentatious pretensions to high feeling,
whose views of life are so truly brutish, that they see hardship
in preventing paupers from breeding hereditary paupers in the
workhouse itself’.¹³ He argues that although the state may have
¹³ Mill, John Stuart, Principles of Political Economy (London: Longmans, Green &
Co., ) .

 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

a duty to feed the destitute, ‘it cannot with impunity take the
feeding upon itself, and leave the multiplying free.’¹⁴ Therefore
he says later that there is ‘evident justification for converting the
moral obligation against bringing children into the world who are
a burden to the community, into a legal one’.¹⁵
These are tough words that will not sit well with those liberals who want to indulge people engaging in grossly irresponsible
reproductive conduct. This concern is not devoid of all foundation.
There is a danger that the selective prohibition will be applied to
the disempowered, while the powerful fail to hold themselves to
the same standards.¹⁶ But there is a cost to not prohibiting the most
harmful reproduction. This, obviously, is the harm to those who
are born as a result. Thus, the more appropriate way of dealing
with very risky or harmful reproductive conduct is to prohibit it,
where it is reasonable to do so, but to control for possible biases in
the deliberative process leading to such prohibition.

D I S A B I L I T Y A N D W RO N G F U L L I F E
Although many people are reluctant to restrict the right to
reproductive freedom, there is widespread agreement that it is
sometimes morally wrong to have children. It is commonly (although
not universally) thought to be wrong, knowingly or negligently
to bring into existence people who will have serious impairments
such as blindness, deafness, or paraplegia. Seriously disabled lives
are often thought not to be worth starting. Some have gone so far
¹⁴ Ibid.
¹⁵ Ibid. .
¹⁶ Some may think that John Stuart Mill is guilty of such class discrimination in
seeking to curb the breeding of the poor. However, he advocated contraception
also for the ‘genteel’ classes. He was arrested, as a youth, for distributing handbills
offering contraceptive advice (to rich and poor), a stunningly avant-garde activity in
the early nineteenth century. See Schwartz, Pedro, The New Political Economy of J.S.
Mill (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, ) , –.

Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

as to suggest that those culpably brought into existence with such
conditions should be able to sue for ‘wrongful life’.¹⁷

The non-identity problem and the disability rights
objection distinguished
At the beginning of Chapter  I considered one objection to the
view that people whose existence is inseparable from their severe
impairments can be harmed by being brought into existence. The
substance of this objection is the ‘non-identity’ problem. This
objection, which I argued could be overcome, is to be distinguished
from another objection to which I now turn. The non-identity
objection does not deny that life with severe impairments is bad.
Indeed it assumes it is. The problem arises because although such
a life is bad, it is purportedly not possible to say that it is worse
than the alternative of never existing and thus it cannot be said
to be harmful to start such a life. The objection that I shall now
consider—a disability rights objection—is different. It questions
the very assumption of the non-identity problem. The objection can
take various forms. In its boldest form, it denies that impairments
(or at least some of them) are bad at all. In its more modest form
it denies that impairments are sufficiently bad as to make lives
with such impairments not worth starting. It follows from this that
various attempts to prevent people with impairments from coming
into existence, including pre-conception genetic screening, not to
mention abortion, are wrong. More specifically, such attempts are
said to express negative judgements about people with disabilities
and the value of their lives. I shall now explain this disability rights
objection and show how my arguments lend surprising and unusual
support to the objection on the way to undoing it.
In discussing the disability rights objection, I shall focus on impairments that are serious but not the most severe. The disability rights
¹⁷ Depending on the circumstances, the respondent would be either the parents
or the doctors who failed to notify the parents of the fetus’s condition.

 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

objection would be highly implausible for those conditions, such as
Tay-Sachs or Lesch-Nyhan, which are so bad that it is quite clearly
in the interests of the sufferer to cease existing. To say of such lives
that they are worth starting or, worse still, that they are not bad at
all, would be to strain credulity beyond all reasonable bounds. Nor
shall I consider the mildest impairments, such as colour-blindness,
which many people would agree are not too bad. Instead I shall focus
on impairments such as an inability to see, hear, or walk. These are
impairments that are often beheld with (sometimes muted) horror
by those who do not have them. Of course, many of those who do
have these impairments would also rather not have them.¹⁸ However, if faced with a choice between never existing and existing with
the impairment, most of those who have the impairment would
rather exist with the impairment. And even more of those with
one of these impairments would rather continue existing with the
impairment than cease to exist. This preference stands in starkest
contrast to those without the impairments who say that they would
rather die than become impaired in these ways. The latter preference is curious given how rarely it survives the acquisition of the
impairment. Most of those who say that they would rather die than
have an impairment such as paraplegia and who then acquire the
impairment change their minds about whether death is preferable.
It should be clear, then, why the serious but not most severe disabilities are the site of most contention and are thus the appropriate
place to focus.

The ‘social construction of disability’ argument
One widely misunderstood argument advanced by disability rights
advocates is the argument that disability is ‘socially constructed’—that is, it is social arrangements that disable people. Many
¹⁸ Not all those with impairments have this view. Most notably, some in the deaf
community prefer to be deaf in much the same way that a French speaker might
prefer being a Francophone to being an Anglophone.

Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

who hear this view dismiss it too quickly. They assume that it is
obviously false. That somebody cannot see or hear or walk, they
say, is not socially constructed, but is instead a fact quite independent of society. This response misunderstands the argument,
which is not that social arrangements make people blind or deaf or
unable to walk. Instead, the argument is that there is a distinction
to be drawn between inabilities and disabilities.¹⁹ A blind person is
unable to see, a deaf person unable to hear, and a paraplegic unable
to walk. These inabilities become disabilities only in certain social
environments. Thus, where buildings are not wheelchair accessible, for example, those unable to walk are disabled with respect to
accessing the building. However, where buildings are wheelchair
accessible no such disability exists for paraplegics. Disability rights
advocates may note that everybody has inabilities. No human
beings have the ability to fly (unaided by machines), but this fact
does not disable the wingless, because buildings are made accessible to the wingless by means of ground-floor entrances and stairs,
ramps, or lifts. We do not think about this because winglessness is
the human norm. If most people had wings, and a few did not, then
those few would be disabled if no accommodations were made for
them. Thus the reason why those with impairments are disabled,
where they are indeed disabled, is not because they have some
inability, but rather because society is constructed in a way that
excludes people with that inability.

¹⁹ Actually, the distinction is usually between impairments and disabilities. (See,
for example, Buchanan, Allen, Brock, Dan, Daniels, Norman, and Wikler, Daniel,
From Chance to Choice (New York: Cambridge University Press, ) . Here they
draw on Boorse, Christopher, ‘On the Distinction between Disease and Illness’,
Philosophy and Public Affairs, / () –.) Impairments are negative departures
from normal species functioning. Although I shall sometimes refer to ‘impairments’,
I shall very often use ‘inabilities’ instead, as this may be a somewhat more powerful
way of presenting the disability rights view. Because everybody, as I shall show, has
some inabilities whereas not everybody has impairments as just defined, the contrast
between inabilities and disabilities is a contrast between a characteristic we all have
and a characteristic only the disabled have.

 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

Now the significance of this is that it is not that the blind are
unable to see or the deaf unable to hear that makes them disabled
and therefore makes their lives go worse. Instead it is the fact that
society does not accommodate their particular inabilities. In other
words, what makes the lives of the blind or deaf go worse is the
discriminatory social environment in which they find themselves.

The ‘expressivist’ argument
This ‘social construction of disability’ argument lends support to
another disability rights argument, one that has been dubbed the
‘expressivist’ argument.²⁰ According to the expressivist argument,
attempts to prevent people with impairments from coming into
existence are objectionable because they express an inappropriate
and hurtful message. This is the message that lives that are
inseparable from impairments are not worth starting and that there
should be no more people whose existence is inseparable from
such impairments. This message, it is said, perpetuates prejudices
about the value of the lives of those who lack sight, hearing,
or the use of their legs, for example. To see better why the
social construction of disability argument lends support to the
expressivist argument, consider racial discrimination. Although
race is not a perfect analogy,²¹ there is some similarity between
racial discrimination and discrimination on the basis of inabilities.
For example, blacks are often disabled by their skin colour, but
this is not because of any inherent property of their skin colour.
Instead it is the result of obstacles that particular societies present
to blacks. It is widely recognized that the fitting response to this
disability is the removal of the obstacles, rather than the suggestion
that no more black babies should be born. To the extent that
²⁰ By Buchanan, Allen, et al, From Chance to Choice. These authors do not
themselves accept the argument.
²¹ Because race is not itself generally an impairment. (There are some cases where
it is: pale skin, for example, makes one more susceptible to skin cancer.)

Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

the disabilities of the impaired are socially constructed, the fitting
response to these disabilities is the removal of obstacles rather than
the suggestion that there should be no more people with such
impairments.

Responding to the disability rights arguments
These arguments raise a formidable challenge to ordinary qualityof-life assessments and judgements about what lives are not worth
starting. I shall not consider the various responses that have been
offered, because these responses all assume that lives without
impairments are lives worth starting. (Indeed, such lives have even
been referred to as ‘perfect’ individuals²² and I have argued that no
actual lives come anywhere near this description.) Instead I shall
show how my argument that coming into existence is always a
serious harm bolsters the disability rights position against its usual
opponents while showing that both it and the position it criticizes
are wrong.
One strength of the ‘social construction of disability’ argument
is that it highlights the fact that there are normal human inabilities
that go unnoticed in most people’s assessments of quality of life.
Part of the explanation for this is the obvious fact that the unusual
generally stands out more than the usual. In this particular case it
is partly because society, unsurprisingly, tends to get constructed
in a way that fits well with the usual range of abilities and inabilities. It is only if special attention is given to unusual inabilities that
these are accommodated. But this does not exhaust the explanation. As we saw in Chapter , various features of our psychology,
including Pollyannaism, adaptation to misfortune, and comparison of one’s own life with the lives of others, all conspire to make
us think that our lives are much better than they really are. We are
blinded, then, to the negative features of our own lives. We can
²² Buchanan, Allen, et al, From Chance to Choice, .

 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

now see that this problem is worse, in some ways, for those with
usual inabilities. Not only does the social structure not show up
these inabilities but neither are there other people without these
inabilities with whom they can compare themselves or who will
compare themselves with them.²³
Disability rights advocates are correct to note that usual
inabilities are ignored in quality-of-life assessments. They are
mistaken, however, in taking that response to normal inabilities
as the standard and in wanting to ignore unusual inabilities too.
Instead, as the discussion in Chapter  shows, we should be
considering all inabilities in assessing the quality of lives. While
it is true that the social environment does minimize the impact
that usual inabilities have on quality of life, many of them do
nonetheless adversely impact on quality of life. Paraplegics may
require special access to public transport, but the inability of
everybody to fly or to cover long distances at great speed means
that even those who can use their legs require transportation
aids. Our lives surely go less well for being so dependent. Our
lives also go less well because we are susceptible to hunger and
thirst (that is unable to go without food and water), heat and
cold, and so on. In other words, even if disability is socially
constructed, the inabilities and other unfortunate features that
characterize normal human lives are enough to make our lives
go very badly—indeed much worse than we usually recognize.
Socially constructed disability makes some lives still worse and
we should certainly join disability rights advocates in seeking
reasonable accommodations that would minimize or remove such
disability. That would not be enough, however, to make any lives
worth starting.
²³ That those with the impairments nonetheless have favourable views of their
quality of life could be explained in two ways. Either Pollyannaism and adaptation
outweigh the unfavourable comparison with those free of the impairment, or those
people with impairments focus on comparisons with those who are still worse off
than they are (which itself would be an instance of Pollyannaism).

Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

Disability rights advocates also correctly note that quality-of-life
assessments differ quite markedly between those who have impairments and those who do not. Many of those without impairments
tend to think that lives with impairments are not worth starting
(and may even not be worth continuing) whereas many of those
with impairments tend to think that lives with these impairments
are worth starting (and certainly are worth continuing). There certainly does seem to be something self-serving about the dominant
view. It conveniently sets the quality threshold for lives worth starting above that of the impaired but below normal human lives. But
is there anything less self-serving about those with impairments setting the threshold just beneath the quality of their lives? Disability
rights advocates argue that the threshold in most people’s judgements about what constitutes a minimally decent quality of life is
set too high. However, the phenomenon of discrepant judgements
is equally compatible with the claim that the ordinary threshold is
set too low (in order that at least some of us should pass it). The
view that it is set too low is exactly the judgement that we can
imagine would be made by an extra-terrestrial with a charmed life,
devoid of any suffering or hardship. It would look with pity on
our species and see the disappointment, anguish, grief, pain, and
suffering that marks every human life, and judge our existence, as
we (humans without unusual impairments) judge the existence of
bedridden quadriplegics, to be worse than the alternative of nonexistence. Our judgements of what constitutes acceptable limits
of suffering are profoundly influenced by the psychological phenomena I described in Chapter . They are accordingly unreliable.
However, it is not only the dominant judgement that is unreliable.
The judgements of those with impairments are also unreliable. The
arguments I advanced in Chapter  showed that all actual lives are
much worse than we think, and that none of our lives are worth
starting.
This conclusion has an interesting implication for the expressivist argument. It will be recalled that according to the expressivist
 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

argument attempts to avoid bringing people with impairments
into existence expresses an offensive view that there should be no
such people and that such lives are not worth starting. In a way
my conclusion simply extends the scope of the ‘offensive’ message,
applying it to all people. Thus I join the opponents of the expressivist argument in agreeing that lives with impairments are not worth
starting, but I do so in a way that will not be pleasing to those
opponents. That is because I deny that any lives are worth starting.
Curiously, however, this may make my view less rather than more
offensive to disability rights activists. Whether or not it has this
effect will depend on whether the offence and hurt of the expressed
message rest on the apparently self-serving, exclusionary, or bigoted judgement that ‘we are okay and you are not’. If that is indeed
the basis for the hurt, then my view, though saying that more lives
are not worth starting, will be less offensive to those with impairments. This is because I am making the claim not only about their
lives, but about everybody’s life, including my own.
The message that there should be no more lives like one’s
own need not be as personally threatening as some people think.
To understand why this is so, consider again, the distinction I
drew in Chapter  between future-life cases and present-life cases.
The judgements we make about future-life cases—judgements
about whether lives are worth starting—are (and should be)
made at a different level from judgements about present-life
cases—judgements about whether lives are worth continuing. To
say that another life qualitatively like one’s own is not worth
starting is not (necessarily) to say that one’s own life is not worth
continuing. Nor is it to undermine the value that one’s life has
to oneself. Of course, it is to say that it would have been better
had one’s own life not started, but that is only threatening if one
contemplates one’s never existing from the perspective of one’s
existing. Put another way, it is to consider a future-life decision
about one’s own life from a present-life perspective. But that is a
mistake. It is to fail to consider truly the counterfactual case where
Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

one does not (yet) exist, and thus has no interest whatsoever in
coming into existence.

Wrongful life
Considering only the arguments in Chapters  and , it might seem
that anybody, not only those with unusually severe impairments,
should be able to sue for wrongful life. However, I have argued
earlier in the current chapter that (at least for now) there should
be a (legal) right to procreative freedom. Although this right must
be defeasible, it cannot be defeated routinely without the case
for its very existence being undermined. If that is the case, then
there should be a legal right to produce children that reasonably
can be expected to have relatively good lives. If the argument for
such a right is strong, then the case for allowing wrongful life
suits by simply anybody is weakened. However, it is not entirely
eliminated. It could still be argued that although people should
be legally entitled to have children, they should not be immune
from civil suit should those children be unhappy with having been
brought into existence. However, this would be a difficult case to
make. For a wrongful life case to be well founded there would have
to be evidence that the respondent acted unreasonably, but that
would be hard to show so long as the case for a legal right to have
children had not crumbled. Remember that the appropriateness
of such a right ultimately rests on the possibility of reasonable
disagreement.
So much for wrongful life suits by people with relatively good
lives. Should those with impairments be able to sue for wrongful
life against those who culpably brought them into existence in such
condition? The case for such suits rests on the plausible view that
if one is going to have children, then one should rather have children whose lives will go better than children whose lives will go
worse. But here we must be cautious. The disability rights arguments show that those without impairments tend to overestimate
 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

how bad life is with the impairments. Now obviously those who
bring wrongful life suits on their own behalf do not think their quality of life is overestimated. However, wrongful life suits are often
brought on behalf of those who are not competent to sue. There is
a real danger in such cases that unimpaired²⁴ judges and juries will
judge by their own unreliable standards. Even where somebody
sues for his own wrongful life, it is likely that judges and juries will
sympathize, because of their biases, with his view even where it
diverges from others with such disabilities. Some may not see this
as a problem because they might take a person’s own assessment
of his quality of life as being decisive. In this case, the views of other impaired people may be viewed as irrelevant. However, because
a wrongful life case must demonstrate that the culpable party was
unreasonable, the views of other people with such conditions are
relevant. If wrongful life suits are to be allowed only in cases of
unusual hardship, then assessment of what constitutes unusually
poor quality of life cannot be idiosyncratic.
The disability rights arguments pose another problem for
wrongful life suits. If lives with impairments are only a little
worse than other lives, then they may not be bad enough to
be distinguished from normal lives for the purposes of wrongful
life suits. Indeed there may be some lives without bodily or
psychological impediments that are worse than some lives with
impairments. A life of extreme poverty, for example, may be worse
than a life of a blind person who has access to reasonable resources.
The life of a fulfilled, happy paraplegic may be of a higher quality
than the life of an unfulfilled, unhappy able-bodied athlete.
Notwithstanding the above concerns, there may be some scope
for wrongful life suits. To judge the strength of the case we would
have to control for the sorts of errors just mentioned. We can
imagine lives, however, of such immense suffering—suffering that

²⁴ That is, those who lack what are usually regarded as impairments.

Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

should have been anticipated and would have been avoided but
for maliciousness or negligence—where wrongful life suits are
entirely apt.

A S S I S T E D A N D A RT I F I C I A L
R E P RO D U C T I O N
I turn now from questions about disability and wrongful life to
questions about assisted and artificial reproduction, on which my
arguments in Chapters  and  also have some bearing.
The terms ‘assisted reproduction’ and ‘artificial reproduction’ are
often used interchangeably, but they are not synonymous. Artificial
reproduction refers to reproduction by non-coital means.²⁵ The idea
here is that coitus is the natural way of bringing sperm and ovum
together. If sperm and ovum are brought together via some other
means, then it is artificial rather than natural. Thus artificial insemination is artificial because insemination is effected by means of an
artefact rather than a (natural) body part. In vitro fertilization, followed by embryo transfer, is also artificial by this standard. So too
is cloning, which does not involve a union of sperm and ovum at
all, and is achieved by technological intervention.
Assisted reproduction, as the term suggests, refers to cases where
those reproducing are assisted in their reproductive activity.
Although most instances of artificial reproduction are also instances
of assisted reproduction, whether all are depends on what one
understands assistance to be. A couple that reproduces by artificial insemination need not be assisted at all, unless one takes the
inseminating implement to be a relevant form of assistance. There
are also possible cases of assisted reproduction that are not cases
²⁵ The one problematic case for this account is that of parthenogenesis, where an
ovum spontaneously undergoes division. However, we can ignore such a case on
the grounds that these cases do not come to term.

 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

of artificial reproduction. Treatment for erectile dysfunction, for
example, might be viewed as assisting people with reproduction
(although it does have other purposes), yet would not fall within
the scope of artificial reproduction as it is usually understood.

Reproductive ethics and sexual ethics
Some people judge artificial reproduction to be unethical because
they think that the only acceptable way to conceive a child is
via a sexual expression of mutual love within the confines of a
marriage. It is not sufficient, on this view, that the reproducing
parties are married to one another, love one another, and seek
to reproduce as an expression of their love. The couple’s mutual
love, expressed sexually, must be the proximate cause of the
child’s conception. I cannot see how this last requirement could
be defended adequately. What is so important about a sexual
expression of love that is a necessary condition for the ethically
acceptable production of a child?
So much for the view that reproduction must be sexual—what
we might call the ‘sexual view of reproductive ethics’. Many of
those who accept this view, along with other people who do not,
accept the opposite conditional: that sexual interactions must be
procreative. We might call this the ‘reproductive view of sexual
ethics’. On this view, sex can only be acceptable morally if it is
directed towards reproduction. This is not to say that all sexual
acts that produce a child are morally acceptable. Rape and adultery,
for example, can produce offspring but typically would not be
morally acceptable. Reproductive possibility is a necessary but not
a sufficient condition for sex to be acceptable. The reproductive
view of sexual ethics does not claim that all coital acts that
do not result in a child are wrong. Many sexual reproductive
attempts simply fail. Instead the reproductive view of sexual ethics
maintains that a sexual act must be of the reproductive sort. This
requirement rules out non-coital sex, including oral and anal sex.
Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

Curiously, and inexplicably, it is not thought to rule out coitus
within a marriage in which one of the partners is infertile.
I mention this view because it has many adherents and because
my arguments pose an unusual challenge to it. My arguments turn
the reproductive view of sexual ethics on its head. Most of those
who reject the reproductive view do so because they think that sex
need not hold procreative possibility in order to be morally acceptable. My arguments produce a much stronger conclusion—for
sex to be morally acceptable it must not be reproductive. In other
words, sex can only be morally acceptable if it is not reproductive.
We might call this the ‘anti-reproductive view of sexual ethics’.
To clarify, this view does not maintain that all non-reproductive
sex is morally acceptable. Non-reproduction is a necessary but
not sufficient condition. Nor does it claim that coitus is wrong,
but only that those coital acts where procreation is not prevented are wrong. But what does it mean to say that procreation is
‘not prevented’? It can refer to cases where no (or poor quality)
contraception was used and which result in a new person being
brought into existence. Does it also refer to cases where a reliable
method of contraception was used, but which happened to fail in
some instance? It certainly seems difficult to hold people responsible for merely possible, though extremely rare, outcomes of their
actions. Is driving a car wrong because my brakes could fail and a
pedestrian could die, or am I only responsible if I drive a car that I
fail to keep well-serviced and of which I consequently lose control,
killing a pedestrian?
The question about rare contraceptive failure would be more
pressing if the harm of coming into existence were inflicted at
the time of conception. However, as I shall argue in the next
chapter (on abortion), this is the wrong way to date the harm
of coming into existence. Contraceptive failure still leaves open
abortive possibility. There are parts of the world, of course, where
abortive possibilities are limited. In such cases the duty to prevent
conception would be stronger, but where conception does occur
 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

despite such attempts those preventing abortion would bear moral
liability for bringing a new person into existence.
To summarize the previous paragraphs, I reject both the sexual view of reproductive ethics and the reproductive view of sexual
ethics. I do so in an unusual way—via an anti-reproductive view
of both reproductive and sexual ethics—rather than by means of
the usual response, which we might call the ‘neutral view’. (See
Tables . and ..)
Table 4.1. Reproductive ethics
Sexual view

Neutral view

Anti-reproductive view

Reproduction can only
be morally acceptable if
it is sexual.

It makes no moral
difference whether
reproduction is sexual
or not.

Reproduction is never
morally acceptable.

Reproductive view

Neutral view

Anti-reproductive view

Sex can only be morally
acceptable if it is
reproductive.

It makes no moral
difference whether sex is
reproductive or not.

Sex can be morally
acceptable only if it is
not reproductive.

Table 4.2. Sexual ethics

If it is wrong to bring new people into existence then it makes no
difference whether one brings them into existence sexually or otherwise. And if bringing new people into existence is wrong, then
child-producing sex is wrong.

The tragedy of birth and the morals of gynaecology26
The scope of the anti-reproductive view of reproductive ethics extends not only to those who are reproducing, but also to
²⁶ This heading, a play on Friedrich Nietzsche’s The Birth of Tragedy and the
Genealogy of Morals, was suggested to me by Allen Buchanan.

Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

anybody who might assist them in this. In other words, my arguments pose a challenge to infertility medicine and its practitioners.
More specifically, my arguments suggest that it is wrong to help
somebody inflict the harm of bringing somebody into existence.
It does not follow from this that providing fertility treatment
should be illegal. If there should be a negative right to reproductive
freedom, then state or other interference with a person’s efforts
to seek out fertility assistance or another person’s willingness to
provide such help, would be precluded. This does not mean that
fertility specialists do no wrong in helping to bring new people into
existence. It means only that they should have the legal freedom
to do so. This freedom is derivative from their patients’ negative
rights to reproductive freedom.
However, a negative legal right not to be prevented from seeking
assistance in reproduction does not ground a positive legal or moral
right to such assistance. Nor, it seems, can such a right be justified
in some other way if my arguments are sound. Thus people should
not be able to demand, as a matter of right, that a medical practitioner with the relevant expertise provide assistance in bringing
new people into existence. Nor may they demand of the state that
it provide resources for such services or the underlying research.
Indeed, the state should not provide such resources. Even where
resources are not limited, the state should not be helping to harm.
Where resources are limited, they should be devoted to preventing
and alleviating harm rather than causing it.

T R E AT I N G F U T U R E P E O P L E A S M E R E
MEANS
There have been a few cases in which people have had a child in
order to save an existing child. For example, a couple may have
a child who develops leukaemia. A bone marrow transplant is
required and there are no suitable donors. The couple decides to
 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

produce a new child that could serve as a donor. Sometimes, the
plan is a mere lottery. The parents conceive and bring to term a
child that they merely hope will be a suitable match. Either way
they will love and rear it. Sometimes, though, there is greater
planning. Embryos are tested to determine whether the child that
would result would be a suitable match and only implanted if they
would be. Or fetuses are tested and aborted if they will not grow
into a child that will be a suitable donor.
Each of these options is more controversial than the preceding
one. There are some people who are troubled even by the first
option—having a child that one hopes, but does not ensure, will be
a suitable match. The objection is that the parents treat the future
child as a mere means to the ends of the existing child and this is
accordingly in violation of the Kantian requirement not to treat
people merely as a means.
This same objection has been raised against reproductive
cloning. It has been said that the clone is not brought into existence
for his or her own sake but rather for the sake of others, including,
very often, the being that is cloned. The clone is treated as a
mere means to the ends of the being cloned. This, it is said, is
unacceptable.
What those who raise the Kantian-like objection routinely
ignore is that in so far as it applies to cloning and cases of having a
child in order to save a child, it applies at least as much to ordinary
cases of having children. This is true irrespective of whether one
accepts that coming into existence is always a serious harm. Clones
and those children who are produced to save the life of a sibling are
not brought into existence for their own sakes. This, however, is
no different from any children. Children are brought into existence
not in acts of great altruism, designed to bring the benefit of life
to some pitiful non-being suspended in the metaphysical void and
thereby denied the joys of life.²⁷ In so far as children are ever
²⁷ Benatar, David, ‘Cloning and Ethics’, QJMed,  () –.

Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 

brought into existence for anybody’s sake it is never for their
own sake.
Thus cloning is, at least in this regard, no more problematic than
ordinary reproduction. Now it might be suggested that cloning is
sometimes worse because, where it is done for the sake of the person cloned, it is also an act of narcissism. The being cloned wants a
physical replica of himself. Thus the clone is treated as a means to
the narcissistic ends of the person cloned. Now there might indeed
be some people who will wish to have themselves cloned for narcissistic reasons, but others may want to be cloned for other reasons (perhaps because it is their only or best chance of reproducing).
Moreover, the argument from narcissism assumes that ordinary
reproduction is not narcissistic. But why should we think that that
is always the case? There could well be something self-adulating
in the desire to produce offspring. Those who adopt children or
do not have children at all could advance the narcissistic objection
against non-clonal reproduction with as much (or as little) force as
non-clonal reproducers do in criticizing cloning. They could argue
that it is narcissistic for a couple to want to create a child in their
combined image, from a mixture of their genes. The point is that
both cloning and usual methods of reproduction may be narcissistic, but neither is it the case that each kind of reproduction must
necessarily be characterized in this way.
Cloning, therefore, is no more problematic than regular reproduction in this regard. It is also no less problematic. By contrast,
the case of having a child in order to save a child is less problematic than ordinary cases of reproduction. In ordinary reproduction
people produce children (a) to satisfy their procreative or parenting interests; (b) to provide siblings to existing children; (c) to
propagate the species, nation, tribe, or family; or (d) for no reason at all. These are all clearly weaker reasons for producing a
child than is the goal of saving the life of an existing person. It
certainly seems strange to think that it is acceptable to have a

 ∼ Having Children: The Anti-Natal View

child for no reason at all, but wrong to have a child in order
to save somebody’s life. If the latter is a case of unjustifiably
treating one person as a means to the ends of others, then this
must apply even more forcefully to all other cases of having
children.

Having Children: The Anti-Natal View ∼ 


Abortion:
The ‘Pro-Death’ View
Cursed be the day on which I was born: let not the day on
which my mother bore me be blessed. Cursed be the man. . .
because he slew me not from the womb; so that my mother might have been my grave and her womb always great.
Why did I come out of the womb to see labour and sorrow?
Jeremiah :–.
And Job spoke, and said, ‘Oh that the day had perished
wherein I was born, and the night which said ‘‘There is a
man child conceived.’’ Let that day be darkness. . .As for the
night, let darkness seize upon it. . .because it did not shut up
the doors of my mother’s womb. . .Why did I not die from
the womb? Why did I not perish when I came out of the
belly?. . .For now should I have lain still and been quiet. . .or
as a hidden untimely birth I had not been; as infants that
never saw light.’
Job : –, , , , , .

I have argued that it is better never to come into existence, but
I have said nothing so far about when—that is, at what stage in
the human developmental process—one comes into existence. It
is to this question (and related issues) that I now turn. Much rests

on the answer to this question. Combining some common, highly
plausible answers with the view that it is better never to come
into existence generates quite radical implications for the abortion
question.
As things stand, most people tend to think that some reason
needs to be provided for having or performing an abortion. Defenders of abortion maintain that adequate reason, at least at the earlier
stages of gestation, need be no more than a preference of the
woman who has the abortion. Nevertheless, it remains true that
here the preference defeats a presumption in favour of continuing
the pregnancy. Some of those who procure or perform abortions
take abortion to be regrettable even when justifiable.
The moral presumptions must be reversed if () coming into
existence is a harm, and () somebody has not yet come into
existence at the particular stage of gestation when the abortion is to
be performed. If both of these conditions are met, then the burden
of proof is shifted to those who would not abort (at the specified
stage of gestation). The failure to abort is what must be defended.
The greater the harm of existence, the harder it will be to defend
that failure. If a third condition is met—() coming into existence
(in ordinary cases) is as great a harm as I have suggested it is—then
the failure to abort (at the specified gestational age) may never, or
almost never, be justified.
I have already considered conditions () and () in earlier chapters.
Thus I focus here only on condition (). Those who adopt the conservative view that one comes into existence at conception will
maintain that there is no stage during gestation at which somebody has not yet come into existence. In advancing an argument
that one begins to come into existence only quite late in the gestational process, I shall reject the conservative view along with some
other views.
Before defending the claim that one begins to come into existence at a relatively late stage in the gestational process, I must clarify what I mean by ‘coming into existence’. This phrase has different
Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View ∼ 

senses—including what we might call the biological sense and the
morally relevant sense. By the biological sense is meant the beginning of a new organism, and by the morally relevant sense is meant
the beginning of an entity’s morally relevant interests. It is the latter sense that I am employing. In doing so, I am not presupposing that there must be different times at which some entity, even
a human being, comes into existence in these different senses. The
two senses are simply two things one might mean by the phrase.
Whether they refer to the same time or different times is a distinct
matter—a matter to which I shall soon turn.
There is something to be said for the view that we come into
existence in the biological sense at the time of conception. Prior to
conception there is only a sperm and an ovum. As these are both
necessary for bringing somebody into existence, but because they
are distinct entities prior to conception, they cannot be identical
with the being that will be brought into existence. Two cannot be
identical with one. Thus we cannot speak of a new organism as
having come into existence prior to conception. Put another way,
each one of us was once a zygote, but none of us was ever a sperm
or an (unfertilized) ovum.¹ Although one could not have come
into existence (in the biological sense) prior to conception, there is
some room for doubting that it is the time of conception at which
a single new organism arises. This is because of the possibility
of monozygotic twinning, which persists for about fourteen days
after conception. One would have to date the beginning of a
being’s irreversible biological individuality still later if one wished
to take the phenomenon of conjoined twins into account.²
However, the question when one comes into existence in the
biological sense need not detain us. This question can be bypassed
¹ This is part of what creates the absurdity in those who, joking about their
conception, say that they remember going to a picnic with their father and coming
back with their mother.
² For more on this, see Singer, Peter, Kuhse, Helga, Buckle, Stephen, Dawson,
Karen, and Kasimba, Pascal (eds.) Embryo Experimentation (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, ) –, –.

 ∼ Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View

if one is interested, as I am, in the morally relevant sense and if, as I
shall argue, one comes into existence in the morally relevant sense
after even the latest reasonable estimate of when one comes into
existence in the biological sense.
To determine when one acquires morally relevant interests,
which is necessary for determining when one comes into existence
in the morally relevant sense, we need to examine different senses
of ‘interest’.

FOUR KINDS OF INTERESTS
Philosophers have offered varying interpretations of what interests
are, and what sorts of entities can have them. I shall discern four
incremental senses of ‘interest’, before showing how the taxonomies of others relate to mine. Then I shall consider which kinds of
interests are morally relevant.
. Functional interests: The first sort of interest is that which
an artefact, such as a car or a computer, is sometimes said
to have. Because artefacts have functions, some things can
promote and others impede those functions. Those things
that facilitate an artefact’s functioning are said to be good for
the artefact, or to be in its interests, and those things that
compromise its functioning are said to be bad for it, or against
its interests. Thus, rust is bad for a car and having wheels is
good.
. Biotic interests: Plants have a different kind of interest. Like
artefacts, they function, and their functioning can be fostered
or impaired. However, unlike artefacts, plants are alive. Their
functions and associated interests are biotic.
. Conscious interest: Conscious animals also function, and as
with plants, their functions are biological. But there is
something that it feels like to be a conscious being. The
associated interests I shall call conscious interests. But this
Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View ∼ 

term requires clarification. By conscious interest I do not
mean an interest that one consciously has—that one is
explicitly aware of having—but rather an interest that can
only be had by those who are conscious. One may, for
instance, have an interest in avoiding pain, without being
aware that one has such an interest.
. Reflective interests: Some animals—typically most humans—
are not only conscious, but are also characterized by various
higher-order cognitive capacities, including self-awareness,
language, symbolization, and abstract reasoning. Such animals are not only conscious, but are also ‘reflective’. They have
interests in the reflective sense that they can be explicitly interested in their interests.
I have stated above that these four senses of interest are
incremental. I can now explain what I meant by that. The
interests have been listed in ascending order. The higher sorts of
interests incorporate the lower ones. Thus, artefacts have ‘mere’
(functional) interests. Living things have biotic interests. Conscious
beings have conscious biotic interests, and ‘reflective’ beings have
self-conscious biotic interests.³
The taxonomy of interests employed by some philosophers
effectively collapses some of the above distinctions. For instance,
Raymond Frey, in arguing against (non-human) animals’ having
moral standing, has distinguished between (a) interest as wellbeing and (b) interest as want.⁴ The word is used in the former
sense when one says that ‘X is in Y’s interests’, and in the latter
³ As a counter-example, some might want to point to the prospect of conscious
or even self-conscious artefacts—Artificial Intelligence. Although this case obviously
requires considerable discussion, I suggest here that any artefact that were genuinely
conscious would qualify in virtue of this as being alive in the relevant sense, even
though it may be somebody’s artefact rather than somebody’s offspring. I have
the same concerns about bringing conscious machines into existence as I do with
bringing conscious humans or animals into existence.
⁴ Frey, R. G., ‘Rights, Interests, Desires and Beliefs’, American Philosophical
Quarterly, / () –.

 ∼ Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View

sense when one says ‘Y has an interest in X.’ In Professor Frey’s
view, interests in the first sense can be attributed to artefacts,
plants,⁵ and animals, given that things can be good or bad for any
of these entities. However, he says that (interests as) wants can
be ascribed only to those beings, such as (adult and lingual child)
humans, that are capable of language.⁶ He argues as follows:
() To want or desire X, one must believe that one does not currently have X.
() To believe that one does not have X is to believe that ‘I have
X’ is false.
() One cannot have such a belief unless one knows how language connects with the world.
() One cannot know how language connects with the world if
one does not have language.
() Therefore, beings that do not have language cannot have
desires.
Professor Frey’s interest as well-being encompasses the first
three senses of interest that I discerned. His interest as want and
what I have called reflective interests would be borne by the same
kinds of beings, even though these two senses of interest are not
the same. That is, ‘interest as want’ and ‘reflective interest’ do not
have the same meaning, but the same kinds of beings would bear
them (on his view).
The environmental philosopher, Paul Taylor, also distinguishes
between (a) X being in Y’s interests and (b) Y having an interest
in X,⁷ but he departs from Raymond Frey in the kinds of entities to
which he attributes interests in these different senses.⁸ In doing so,
⁵ He does not explicitly mention plants, but given his arguments we can
confidently include them in this category.
⁶ Given the incremental nature of the interests, beings with language obviously
have the lesser interest as well-being (the (a)-sense) in addition to interest as want
(the (b)-sense).
⁷ Taylor, Paul W., Respect for Nature (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
) .
⁸ Ibid. –.

Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View ∼ 

he collapses my taxonomy in a different way from Professor Frey.
Professor Taylor claims that not only humans but also conscious
animals can have interests in the (b)-sense. But, like humans and
conscious animals, non-conscious animals and plants can have a
good of their own. Things can be good or bad for them. They
can have interests in the (a)-sense. The same, he says, is not true
of mere things and artefacts. When we speak about what is good
for a machine we must make reference not to the machine’s own
purposes but to the purposes invested in it by those who make
or use it. On this view, mere things and artefacts have interests in
no sense.
Whereas Paul Taylor denies interests (in every sense) only to
mere things and artefacts, Joel Feinberg denies interests also to
non-conscious biotic entities, such as plants.⁹ He denies, in other
words, that there can be interests in either the functional or biotic
sense. This is because he denies that artefacts or plants really have
a good (even though we do sometimes speak as though they
do). Professor Feinberg does not employ, and therefore implicitly
collapses, the distinction between interests in the (a)-sense and
interests in the (b)-sense. It is on precisely these grounds that Tom
Regan¹⁰ takes issue with him. Professor Regan, who defends the
distinction between interests in the (a)-sense and interests in the
(b)-sense, refers to them, respectively, as Interests1 and Interests2 .
He argues that we cannot infer from the fact that artefacts and
plants do not have a certain kind of good—a conscious good, or
‘happiness’—that they do not have any kind of good at all. Like
⁹ Feinberg, Joel, ‘The Rights of Animals and Unborn Generations’, Rights, Justice
and the Bounds of Liberty (Princeton: Princeton University Press, ) –. (This
essay first appeared in William T. Blackstone (ed.) Philosophy and Environmental Crisis
(Athens: University of Georgia Press, ) –.) Following Professor Feinberg,
Bonnie Steinbock takes the same view. See her Life Before Birth (New York: Oxford
University Press, ) –.
¹⁰ Regan, Tom, ‘Feinberg on What Sorts of Beings Can Have Rights?’, Southern
Journal of Philosophy,  () –. Robert Elliot offers a defence of Joel Feinberg
in his ‘Regan on the Sorts of Beings that Can Have Rights’, Southern Journal of
Philosophy,  () –.

 ∼ Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View

Raymond Frey, Tom Regan thinks that artefacts, plants, animals,
and humans can all have interests in some or other sense (although
these two philosophers disagree about which kinds of interests are
morally relevant).
The relationship between the above taxonomies can be represented more clearly in diagrammatic form, as shown in Figure ..

(a) X is in Y’s interests (b) Y has an interest in X
(Interests2)

(Interests1)

Artefacts
Humans

Plants

Raymond Frey

Animals

Plants

(Conscious) Animals

Paul Taylor

Humans
(Conscious) Animals
Joel Feinberg
Humans

Artefacts

(Conscious) Animals

Plants

Humans

Tom Regan

Figure 5.1.

It is a mistake to attempt to settle the question whether some
kind of entity is morally considerable merely by determining whether

Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View ∼ 

it has interests. Having interests may be necessary for having moral
standing, but it is not sufficient. If an entity does not have interests
then it cannot be harmed or benefited and thus it cannot have moral
standing. However, it is logically possible for an entity to have
interests, but only morally irrelevant ones. The crucial question,
then, is which kinds of interests are morally relevant.
As we have seen, there is considerable disagreement about this.
Raymond Frey thinks that only interests2 are morally relevant,
whereas Paul Taylor thinks that both interests1 and interests2 are
morally relevant. Joel Feinberg thinks that all interests are morally
relevant, but this is because he opts for a very restricted notion of
‘interests’.
Sparse taxonomies of interests—ones that recognize only one
or two kinds of interests—either lump together kinds of interests
that should be distinguished, or arbitrarily exclude some kinds
of interests. It is for this reason that I have provided a fourfold
classification, which plots out all the different ways in which
the concept of ‘interests’ is commonly invoked. We can then
ask which of these kinds of interests are morally relevant. It
is possible, of course, to have a still richer classification than
mine—one that recognizes degrees of consciousness or of selfconsciousness, for example. However, such a classification would
become unwieldy and therefore less helpful. Moreover, it would
pick out differences in degree rather than differences in kind. As
will become evident later, differences in degree can be considered
fruitfully after considering what kinds of interests are morally
considerable.

W H I C H I N T E R E S T S A R E M O R A L LY
CONSIDERABLE?
How does one decide which of the four kinds of interest are morally relevant? This is not a simple matter. It seems as though the
 ∼ Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View

arguments for some or other sense of interest are not so much arguments for accepting that sense of interest, but rather explanations
of the intuition that that sense of interest is morally relevant. Put
another way, it is hard to see how to argue against those whose
intuitions differ from one’s own. I shall illustrate this by attempting to show why I think that conscious interests are the minimum
kind of morally relevant interest. Here is a formalized version of
one such argument—an argument that has been advanced in varying forms by a few authors:¹¹
() To say that an interest is morally relevant is to say that it
matters (morally).
() If an interest is to matter morally, it must matter to the entity
whose interest it is.
() For an entity’s interest to matter to it, there must be something that it is (that is, feels) like to be that entity.
() There can only be something that it feels like to be a particular entity if that entity is conscious.
() Therefore, only conscious beings can have morally relevant
interests.
To avoid misunderstanding, I want to clarify what is meant
by saying that an entity’s interests matter to it. It does not mean
that one wants what is in one’s interests.¹² Instead it means that
there is something that it is like to have one’s interests served or
impeded. Recognizing this enables us to see that there may be
an ambiguity in the phrase ‘Y has an interest in X’. This phrase
can mean either that ‘X matters to Y’ or that ‘Y wants X’. Thus,
even if one were to agree with Raymond Frey that animals do
¹¹ See, for example: Feinberg, Joel, Rights, Justice and the Bounds of Liberty, ;
Thompson, Janna, ‘A Refutation of Environmental Ethics’, Environmental Ethics, /
() – (See, especially, p. ); Steinbock, Bonnie, Life Before Birth, ; Boonin,
David, A Defense of Abortion (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ) .
¹² This is the very interpretation that Don Marquis assumes in his critique of
Bonnie Steinbock. See his ‘Justifying the Rights of Pregnancy: The Interest View’,
Criminal Justice Ethics, / () –.

Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View ∼ 

not have wants—something I would deny—they could still have
morally considerable interests. In other words, one might say that
there is a kind of interest intermediate between (a) interest as wellbeing; and (b) interest as want. It is a kind of interest that involves
more than just having a good of one’s own (as plants arguably may
have), but need not involve as much as a desire that one has selfconsciously.
Now the problem with any argument such as the one I have
advanced in () to () above is that the crucial premiss—premiss
() in this case—is one that will be disputed by those who do not
share the intuition embodied in the conclusion. Premiss () seems
entirely reasonable to me. How, I wonder, can any entity care
about its welfare or some aspect of it if there is nothing that it feels
like to be such an entity? But the problem is that those who do not
share my intuitions can simply deny the premiss. They might claim
that there are non-conscious ways in which an entity’s welfare can
matter to it. (For example, water deprivation may matter to a plant
in that it wilts and dies as a result.) Or they might claim that there
is something that it is like to be a plant (for example), so long as we
do not equate ‘there is something that it is like to be a plant’ with
‘there is something that it feels like to be a plant’. The point can be
put another way. To many of us, it seems crucial that one cannot
be cruel or kind to plants (because they are not conscious). But
others wonder why we should think that only cruelty and kindness
are relevant.¹³ If we can harm or benefit plants in other ways, why
should these other ways not be relevant?
I do not see any decisive argument that could engage and
undermine the view of those who think that non-conscious biotic
interests are morally relevant. The same is not true, I think,
when it comes to the view that functional interests are morally
relevant. This view can be decisively rejected on the grounds that
functional interests are really interests of the artefacts only in a
¹³ Regan, Tom, ‘Feinberg on What Sorts of Beings Can Have Rights?’, .

 ∼ Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View

figurative sense.¹⁴ I shall not spell out the details of this argument,
however, primarily because the question of functional interests can
be bypassed in a discussion about abortion, given that zygotes,
embryos, and fetuses are never artefacts and thus never have mere
functional interests.
Because I cannot give a decisive argument against the moral
relevance of non-conscious biotic interests, my argument strategy
will be to point out the implications of regarding biotic interests as
morally relevant and to show that most if not all pro-lifers do not
embrace them.
As I shall show later, fetuses only become conscious quite
late in the gestational period. Thus, if conscious interests are the
most basic morally relevant interests, fetuses will acquire morally
relevant interests only very late. One way of grounding a pro-life
argument would be to claim that biotic interests are also morally
relevant. However, if biotic interests count morally, a principle of
equality would require that equal biotic interests count equally.
Thus, it cannot be only human biotic interests that are relevant.
The interests of plants, bacteria, viruses, and so forth must count
as much as the biotic interests of human embryos and preconscious
fetuses. But those are implications that very few (if any) pro-lifers
will embrace. Consistency requires, then, that they do not ground
their view on a claim to the moral relevance of biotic interests. (Of
course, this does not mean that there is no other way to support a
pro-life position, and I shall consider some other arguments later.)
Those who take biotic interests to be morally relevant do not
deny that conscious interests are also relevant. They object only to
setting the threshold of relevance above biotic interests. There is
another challenge to those who take conscious interests to be the
minimum morally relevant interests. This challenge comes from
those who would set the threshold above conscious interests—at
¹⁴ Tom Regan (‘Feinberg on What Sorts of Beings Can Have Rights?’) denies this,
but Robert Elliot (‘Regan on the Sorts of Beings that Can Have Rights’) provides a
compelling response.

Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View ∼ 

the level of reflective interests. The implications of this view are
also implausible. If only reflective interests count morally, then
there can be nothing (directly) wrong with torturing beings that
are conscious but not self-conscious—most animals and all human
neonates. We can reject the view that only reflective interests
count.

W H E N D O E S C O N S C I O U S N E S S B E G I N ? ¹⁵
None of us can remember when we first became conscious.
Therefore, although we were all once fetuses and infants, we
cannot settle the question when, in the human developmental
process, consciousness begins, by reference to our own recollected
experience. To determine when consciousness begins we must
treat fetal and infant minds as ‘other minds’. Not having firstperson access to them, we must infer what they are like from thirdperson accessible information.
Consider, first, indirect functional evidence of consciousness
that is provided by electroencephelography (EEG). The EEG,
which records electrical activity of the brain, can provide data
about a functional capacity—wakefulness—that is required for
consciousness. Wakefulness, it must be stressed, is not to be confused with consciousness itself, at least in neurological parlance.
Instead, it is a state of arousal that is to be contrasted with (the
various stages of ) sleep. Arousal is a state of the ascending arousal system in the brain stem and thalamus. It is not a state of the
cerebral cortex. Where the ascending arousal system is connected to an intact functional cortex, its activities bring about changes
in the cortex that are discernable clinically and electroencephalographically. While consciousness is supervenient on the function
¹⁵ Material in this section is drawn from a paper Michael Benatar and I coauthored: ‘A Pain in the Fetus: Ending Confusion about Fetal Pain’, Bioethics, /
() –.  Blackwell Publishers Ltd.

 ∼ Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View

of the cortex, it is only possible in the wakeful state. In this sense,
the brainstem and thalamus only support consciousness indirectly.
Since arousal states—wakefulness and sleep—are states of the
brain stem and thalamus (even though they usually have cortical
consequences), and consciousness is a function of the cortex, wakefulness and consciousness are separable. One can be awake but not
conscious. This occurs when the ascending arousal system is in the
awake mode, but the cortex is impaired in particular ways. For
instance, some patients in persistent vegetative states exhibit wakeful EEG patterns but are unconscious.¹⁶
Whereas wakefulness is not sufficient for the presence of
consciousness, it seems reasonable to assume that consciousness
is not possible in the absence of wakefulness. Although sleeping
people are sometimes responsive to their environment—that is to
say, they can react to stimuli—they are not aware or conscious.
If this assumption is correct, then a being that lacks the capacity
for wakefulness will also lack the capacity for consciousness. Thus
EEGs provide evidence for a condition—wakefulness—without
which consciousness is not possible, even though they do not
provide evidence of consciousness itself.
Although there are intermittent bursts of (sleep pattern) electroencephalographic activity in fetuses as young as twenty weeks gestation, it is only around thirty weeks that EEGs reveal sleep–wake
cycles. In other words, it is only around thirty weeks that the
first wakeful states are discernable. At this early stage, it must be
emphasized, the EEG patterns for wakefulness and sleep are quite
different from those of the adult. In the first few months of postnatal life the fetal EEG pattern gradually gives way to one that
much more closely resembles the adult pattern, even though maturation of the EEG continues throughout the first year of life and,
to a lesser extent, throughout childhood and adolescence.
¹⁶ Multi-Society Task Force on PVS, Medical Aspects of the Persistent Vegetative
State, New England Journal of Medicine, / () –.

Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View ∼ 

There are at least two explanations for the relatively large difference between fetal and adult EEGs. One is that the sort of wakefulness needed for consciousness has not yet developed. The other is
that the electroencephalographic differences are a result of the general immaturity (and thus difference) of the fetal nervous system,
but suggest nothing about the absence of the neurological function necessary for consciousness. On this view, fetal wakefulness
may produce a different EEG, but may still facilitate consciousness.
How does one choose between these possible explanations?
One way is to turn from functional evidence for wakefulness
to behavioural evidence for consciousness and conscious states
such as pain. Consider, for example, the study by Kenneth Craig
et al,¹⁷ in which the Neonatal Facial Coding System (NFCS) was
used to evaluate the response of pre-term neonates to noxious and
non-noxious stimuli. Neonates of varying ages were videotaped
before, during, and after a heel swab and lancing procedure. The
heel swab provides a non-noxious stimulus, whereas the heel lance
is a noxious stimulus that would be painful in conscious beings
with a mature nervous system. In response to the lance but not
the swab, infants older than twenty-eight weeks gestation were
found to exhibit a distinct set of facial movements that are also
characteristic of term infants and adults subject to painful stimuli.
These facial movements include brow lowering, eyes squeezed
shut, deepening of the nasolabial furrow, open lips and mouth, and
a taut, cupped tongue.¹⁸ The authors of this study also observed
that these facial movements varied depending on whether the
premature infant was asleep or awake at the time of the lancing.
Given that wakefulness facilitates consciousness and thus pain,
this observation is noteworthy. In contrast to these striking
observations about humans of twenty-eight weeks gestational age,
¹⁷ Craig, K. D., Whitfield, M. F., Grunau, R. V., Linton, J., and Hadjistavropoulos,
H. D., ‘Pain in the Preterm Neonate: Behavioural and Physiological Indices’, Pain,
/ () –.
¹⁸ Ibid.

 ∼ Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View

infants of twenty-five to twenty-seven weeks gestation did not
display a response sufficiently different from baseline.¹⁹
It is possible, and sceptics of fetal pain might well rush to say,
that the facial movements observed in the older pre-term neonates
are mere reflexes and do not reflect any (unpleasant) mental state.
There is no way decisively to lay such doubts to rest. Nevertheless, the complex and coordinated nature of this behaviour makes
it harder to dismiss as a mere reflex.
Reflexive behaviour is that which does not result from a
conscious mind. Thus withdrawing from a noxious stimulus is
reflexive if it is not a result of a painful feeling. It is not a reflex
if it does result from such a feeling. From this, it should not
be concluded that the presence of a reflex and the presence of
pain are mutually incompatible. Spinal reflexes, for example, can
result in the withdrawal of a limb from the source of a noxious
stimulus even before the pain-causing impulse has reached the
cortex. The withdrawal movement is itself reflex. It does not
follow that there is not an accompanying painful sensation, even
if that sensation is not the cause of the reflex but rather occurs
milliseconds after it. Distinguishing between those behaviours that
are both reflexive and unaccompanied by painful experiences,
and behaviour, whether reflexive or not, that is accompanied by
pain, can be attempted only by inference. Common sense, derived
in part from observing neonates, suggests that humans of late
gestational and early post-term age are conscious. The dominant
scientific opinion reinforces common sense.
In conclusion, then, there is non-negligible evidence to think
that from around twenty-eight to thirty weeks gestational age,
fetuses are conscious, at least in some minimal sense. Given the
evidence and the gradual nature of the developmental process, it
is highly unlikely that the earliest manifestation of consciousness is
¹⁹ The authors of this study caution that the failure to detect these behavioural
changes in the younger age group might be an artefact of the small number of infants
studied.

Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View ∼ 

fully formed. It is much more likely that the level of consciousness
evolves. Indeed, in humans, consciousness also gradually develops
into self-consciousness. Thus, conscious interests do not suddenly
arise. Instead they emerge gradually, even if not at a constant pace.

INTERESTS IN CONTINUED EXISTENCE
If one only comes into existence in the morally relevant sense at
around twenty-eight or thirty weeks gestation, then prior to that
stage somebody’s coming into existence can still be prevented by
means of an abortion. Therefore, if it is better never to come into
existence it is better, prior to this time, to be aborted than to be
brought to term.
It does not follow from this that abortion any time after around
twenty-eight to thirty weeks is (even prima facie) wrong. This is
because somebody might grant that a minimally conscious entity
may have morally considerable interests, but deny that it has a
morally considerable interest in continued existence. Thus, it may be
argued, it would be prima facie wrong to inflict pain on a conscious
(but non-self-conscious) entity, but it may not be wrong to kill it
painlessly.
Michael Tooley is one exponent of this view.²⁰ His argument
(part of which resembles the argument of Raymond Frey’s that I
outlined earlier)²¹ can be presented as follows:
() The statement ‘A has a right to continue to exist as a subject
of experiences and other mental states’ is roughly synonymous with the statement ‘A is a subject of experiences and other mental states, A is capable of desiring to continue to exist
as a subject of experiences and other mental states, and if A
²⁰ Tooley, Michael, ‘Abortion and Infanticide’, Philosophy and Public Affairs, /
() –.
²¹ Although I have presented them in the reverse order, Professor Tooley’s paper
was published before Professor Frey’s.

 ∼ Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View

()
()
()
()
()

()

does desire to continue to exist as such an entity, then others
are under a prima facie obligation not to prevent him from
doing so.’²²
To have a desire is to want a certain proposition to be true.
To want a proposition to be true one must understand that
proposition.
One cannot understand a given proposition unless one has
the concepts involved in it.
Therefore, the desires one can have are limited by the concepts one possesses.
Neither a fetus (at any stage of its development) nor a young
infant can have concepts of itself as a subject of experiences
and other mental states.
Therefore, neither a fetus nor an infant can have a right to
continue to exist.

Professor Tooley speaks about when an entity can have a right to
continued life—and he sometimes speaks about a serious right of
this kind. Since I am less concerned here with rights than with
the (related) concept of interests, I shall discuss his argument as an
argument about why fetuses and infants cannot have an interest in
continued existence.
There are a number of extremely controversial premisses in his
argument. First, it is far from clear that an interest in (or right to)
continued existence, when unpacked, must make reference to a
desire for continued existence. It would surely be sufficient that one
desires something else that will require continued life in order to
be satisfied. Thus if some merely conscious being wants more of
the same pleasurable experience it just had, and if that desire and
the interest to which it gives rise is morally considerable, this being
may have an interest, even if only a weak one, in continued life.
In response to this it might be said that no fetuses or young
infants can have any desires. But, it is no less controversial that
²² Tooley, Michael, ‘Abortion and Infanticide’, .

Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View ∼ 

an interest in continued existence, when unpacked, must make
reference to any desire. It is entirely possible that one’s interests are
served by continued life even if one does not desire it. Professor
Tooley does gesture at this problem when he revises his analysis
and says that ‘an individual’s right to X can be violated not
only when he desires X, but also when he would now desire X
were it not for one of the following: (i) he is in an emotionally
unbalanced state; (ii) he is temporarily unconscious; (iii) he has
been conditioned to desire the absence of X.’²³ These amendments
avoid some embarrassing counter-examples. But why, we may
wonder, should an additional stipulation not be added?: (iv) he
lacks the necessary concepts. What motivates the first three
conditions is a sense that continued life is in the interests of those
who meet these conditions. But many of us have the same sense
that continued life can be in the interests of a conscious entity that
lacks the concept of itself as the subject of experiences. If one is
going to shoehorn some cases into a desire account one could as
easily add another. But a better approach is to say that it is interests
(of conscious beings) rather than desires that count.
Even if a capacity for desires were necessary, we could still dispute the second premiss—that to have a desire is to want a certain proposition to be true. We can speak quite meaningfully of a
baby’s desire to have his hunger satiated even if he cannot entertain propositions about hunger and food and the relation between
them. When the second premiss collapses, so does the rest of the
argument.
Although I think that Professor Tooley’s argument should be
rejected, his view has a kernel of truth that can be endorsed. To
say, as I have suggested, that a minimally conscious entity can have
an interest in continued existence is not to say that that interest is
anything like as strong as that of a self-conscious entity. Where the
interest in continued living is derivative from quite rudimentary
²³ Tooley, Michael, ‘Abortion and Infanticide’, .

 ∼ Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View

interests in further pleasurable experiences, it is much weaker than
it becomes when self-consciousness and projects and goals emerge.
Then the being is much more invested in its own life and stands to
lose much more by dying or being killed. That the earliest interests
are weak ones, however, does not mean that they are not interests
at all.
One advantage of my view is that moral standing is not something one either has or does not have. There can be varying degrees
of it. Given that moral standing is supervenient on other properties, such as consciousness and self-consciousness, and these other
properties develop gradually rather than arise suddenly, it makes
sense that moral standing be a matter of degree. It would be very
odd if it were not wrong at all to kill beings until a certain stage in
the developmental process and then it suddenly became seriously
wrong to kill them.
Given this, we can see that when one begins to acquire morally
relevant interests is not the only pertinent question in considering
whether abortion is morally preferable. It also matters how strong
an interest one has in continued existence. Weak and limited
interests will be defeated more easily by other considerations.
These considerations include the interests of others, but they also
include factors like the future quality of life of the person who will
develop from the fetus or young infant.
So long as an entity is only minimally invested in its own
life, this interest will be more easily defeated by the prospect
of future harm. As the interest in existing strengthens, the
harms that are required to defeat that interest become more
severe. Thus, some late term abortions—after the development
of consciousness—and even some instances of infanticide may be
morally desirable, if they prevent the continuation of particularly
unpleasant existences.
There are two quite famous lines of argument that threaten
the view that morally relevant interests, including interests in
living, emerge gradually. The first of these is R. M. Hare’s Golden
Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View ∼ 

Rule argument and the second is Don Marquis’s Future-Like-Ours
argument. Both of these arguments aim to show that abortion,
even at the earliest stages of pregnancy, is prima facie wrong. I shall
consider and reject each of these arguments in turn.

T H E G O L D E N RU L E
Richard Hare famously employed the ‘Golden Rule’ to make a
prima facie case against abortion.²⁴ The Golden Rule (in its positive
form) says that ‘we should do unto others as we would have them
do to us.’²⁵ Logically extending this, he says, yields the rule that
‘we should do to others as we are glad was done to us.’²⁶ Given
this, since ‘we are glad that nobody terminated the pregnancy
that resulted in our birth,. . .we are enjoined, ceteris paribus, not to
terminate any pregnancy which will result in the birth of a person
having a life like ours.’²⁷
Although much can and has been said about the weaknesses of
this argument, I shall discuss those of its flaws that are highlighted
by the arguments I have advanced about the harm of coming into
existence.
It is not true, of course, that everybody is glad not to have been
aborted. Professor Hare considers the challenge such people pose
to his argument. However, he argues that they must wish that
had they been glad to have been born, then nobody should have
aborted them. The problem with this response is that it assumes
that the preference to have been born is the moral touchstone.
Had he taken the preference not to have been born as the standard,
then it could be said that those who are glad to have been born
²⁴ Hare, R. M., ‘Abortion and the Golden Rule’, Philosophy and Public Affairs, /
() –.
²⁵ Ibid. . In its negative form it says that we should not do unto others as we
would not have them do to us.
²⁶ Ibid. .
²⁷ Ibid.

 ∼ Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View

must wish that had they not been glad, then somebody should
have aborted them. It is obvious that had either kind of person
had the opposite preference to the one he does have, the Golden
Rule argument would produce the opposite conclusion to the one
it does produce when his preference is the way it actually is. Thus
Professor’s Hare’s response to the case of those who are not glad
to have been born will not do.
How might we decide which preference—for or against having
been born—should prevail? One argument that may be advanced
for favouring the preference for having been born is that most
fetuses develop into people that have this preference. Thus,
working on the presumption that this preference will result is
statistically more reliable. However, there are two reasons why,
statistical reliability notwithstanding, this preference should not
predominate.
First is a principle of caution. Followers of this principle recognize that nobody suffers if one mistakenly presumes a preference
not to have been born, but people do suffer if one mistakenly presumes a preference to have been born. Imagine that one presumes
that a fetus will develop into somebody who will be glad to have
been born. One therefore does not abort the fetus. If one’s presumption was mistaken, and this fetus develops into somebody who was
not glad to have been born, then there is somebody who suffers
(for a lifetime) from one’s having made the wrong presumption.
Imagine now that one makes the opposite presumption—that the
fetus will develop into somebody who will not be glad to have been
born. Therefore one aborts that fetus. If this presumption was mistaken, and this fetus would have developed into somebody who
would have been glad to have been born, there will be nobody
who suffers from the mistaken presumption.
It might be objected that there is somebody who suffers from
the latter presumption—namely the fetus that is aborted. There
are two points that can be made in response. First, this line of
reply is not open to Professor Hare. He believes that where an
Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View ∼ 

abortion will be performed the ‘foetus does not have now, at the
present moment, properties which are reasons for not killing it,
given that it will die in any case before it acquires those properties
which ordinary human adults and even children have, and which
are our reasons for not killing them’.²⁸ Professor Hare’s argument is
explicitly about the potential of the fetus rather than any properties
it has as a fetus. Secondly, to claim (contrary to Professor Hare)
that a fetus does now possess properties that can make it the victim
of abortion is to undercut the point of a potentiality argument,
such as the Golden Rule argument, against abortion. The entire
point of an argument from potentiality is to show that abortion can
be wrong even if the fetus does not, as a fetus, have properties that
are reasons for not killing it.
A second reason for favouring a preference not to have been
born is that coming into existence, as I argued in Chapters 
and , is always a serious harm. If those arguments are sound then
people who think that they were benefited by being brought into
existence are mistaken and their preference to have come into
existence is thus based on a mistaken belief. It would be quite
odd to employ a Golden Rule (or Kantian) argument that rests
on a mistaken premiss. If a preference is uninformed why should
it dictate how we should treat others? Imagine, for example, a
widespread preference for having been introduced to cigarettes,
which was based on ignorance of the risks of smoking. Employing
Professor Hare’s rule, people with such a desire could reason: ‘I am
glad that I was encouraged to smoke, and thus I should encourage
others to smoke.’ Such reasoning is troubling enough when the
preference for having been encouraged to smoke is formulated
in the full knowledge of the dangers of smoking. But where the
preference is uninformed it cannot even claim to be an (accurate)
all things considered judgement and is thus even more troubling.
²⁸ Hare, R. M., ‘A Kantian Approach to Abortion’, Essays on Bioethics (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, ) .

 ∼ Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View

Similarly, that many people are glad to have come into existence
is not a good reason for bringing others into existence, especially
where the preference for existence arises from the mistaken belief
that one was benefited by being brought into existence.
That the preference for having been born is mistaken lends
further support to another (independently) very strong criticism of
Professor Hare’s argument. It has been noted that the first premiss
of his argument—the logical extension of the Golden Rule—is
false. There is a difference between being glad that somebody did
something for one and thinking that that person was obligated to
have done as he did. Not everything that we might wish to be done
(or are glad was done) is something that we think should be done
(or should have been done). We can wish to be treated in ways that
we recognize others are not duty-bound to treat us (or we them).²⁹
This is true even where one’s preferences are not defective. The
point is still more powerful when our preferences are uninformed
and mistaken.
If, as I have suggested, coming into existence is harmful, and one
has not (at the earlier stages of pregnancy) already come into existence in the morally relevant sense, then rational parties would will
that they had been aborted. Applying the Golden Rule would then
require that they do likewise to others.

A ‘FUTURE LIKE OURS’
Don Marquis’s argument³⁰ against abortion starts from the assumption that it is wrong to kill us— adult human beings (or at
least those adult humans with lives worth continuing, who are
innocent of any action that would make it permissible to kill them).
²⁹ Boonin, David, ‘Against the Golden Rule Argument Against Abortion’, Journal
of Applied Philosophy, / () –.
³⁰ Marquis, Don, ‘Why Abortion is Immoral’, The Journal of Philosophy, / ()
–.

Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View ∼ 

The best explanation of why this is wrong, he says, is that the loss
of one’s life deprives one of the value of one’s future. When one
is killed one is deprived of all future pleasures, and of the ability
to pursue one’s present and future goals and projects. But most
fetuses have a valuable future like ours. Thus, concludes Professor
Marquis, it must also be wrong to kill these fetuses.
Professor Marquis notes that his argument has a number of
virtues. First, it avoids the problem of speciesism. That is to say,
it does not claim that human fetal life is valuable merely because it
is human. If there are non-human animals who also have valuable
futures then it would be wrong to kill them too. And it would
not necessarily be wrong to kill those humans, including fetuses,
whose future quality of life promises to be so poor that they do
not have valuable futures. Secondly, the future-like-ours argument
avoids the problems that arise from the view that it is only wrong
to kill ‘persons’—rational, self-conscious beings. On the futurelike-ours argument but not on the personhood criterion, killing
of young children and infants is obviously wrong, and for the
same reason that killing adults is wrong. Thirdly, the future-likeours argument does not say that abortion is wrong because it
involves the killing of potential persons. Such arguments are unable
to explain why potential persons are entitled to the same treatment
as actual persons. The future-like-ours argument is based on an
actual property of the fetus—that it has a future like ours—rather
than some potential property.
Professor Marquis considers and rejects two alternatives to his
future-like-ours account. According to the ‘desire account’, what is
wrong with killing us is that it thwarts the important desire people
have to continue living. But this account, Professor Marquis says,
is unable to explain why it is wrong to kill depressives, who have
lost the will to live, or those who are sleeping or comatose and
therefore cannot be said to have a desire, at the time they are killed,
to continue living. Although others have defended a modified
desire version of the future-like-ours argument, one that permits
 ∼ Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View

abortion,³¹ I propose instead to defend what Don Marquis calls
a ‘discontinuation account’. On this account killing us is wrong
because it involves the discontinuation of the valuable experiences,
activities, and projects of living. Until quite late in pregnancy,
as we have seen, fetuses have no experiences, and a fortiori no
projects or activities (in any relevant sense).³² Thus abortion, prior
to the development of consciousness, would not be wrong on the
discontinuation account.
Don Marquis says that it cannot be the mere discontinuation of
experiences that is wrong. If the future experiences will be ones of
unmitigated suffering, discontinuation may actually be preferable.
Thus, the discontinuation account cannot work unless it refers to
the value of the experiences that may be discontinued. Moreover,
he says, the nature of the immediately past experiences of a person
are not relevant. It makes no difference, he says, whether a person has been in intolerable pain, has been in a coma, or has been
enjoying a life of value. He concludes that it is only the value of the
person’s future that matters. If that is so, he says, then the discontinuation account must collapse into a future-like-ours account.
But this inference is too quick. A discontinuation account may
say that, although the value of the future is necessary for explaining
the wrong of killing (those with a valuable future), it is not sufficient. Such an account may hold that only a being with morally relevant interests can have a morally relevant interest in its valuable
future. Thus it is the discontinuation of a life of a being that already
has morally relevant interests that is wrong. In other words, for
killing to be wrong, the future must be a valuable one, but it must
also be the future of a being that already counts morally.
Now, Don Marquis might respond that all entities with a future
like ours do, in virtue of having such a future, have a morally
considerable interest—the interest in enjoying that future. But
³¹ Boonin, David. A Defense of Abortion, –.
³² I add this qualification in case there are some who would want to list ‘growing’,
in utero ‘kicking’ etc., as activities.

Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View ∼ 

why does he think that a (relatively undeveloped) human fetus now
has such an interest? His answer seems to be that we can by then
uniquely identify the entity that will later enjoy that future. This
is apparent in his discussion of why contraception is not ruled out
by the future-like-ours argument. Contraception prevents futures
like ours, but he says that in the case of contraception we cannot
(non-arbitrarily) pick out the subject of the deprived future. He
considers four possible subjects of harm: () some sperm or other;
() some ovum or other; () a sperm and ovum separately; and () a
sperm and ovum together. He argues that choosing () is arbitrary
because one could as easily choose (). And () is arbitrary because
one could as easily choose (). Subject () cannot be right because
then there would be too many futures—that of the sperm and
that of the ovum—rather than only the one future of the person
who would result were contraception not practised. Finally, he
says that () cannot be correct. There is no actual combination of
sperm and ovum. If it is a possible combination, we cannot say, of
all the possible combinations, which one it is.
I do not think that the morality of abortion or contraception,
unlike the issue of when one comes into existence in the biological
sense, rests on the identity of an entity. Don Marquis obviously
disagrees but because he does so, his view has an odd implication.
To see this, imagine that human reproductive biology were a little
different from the way it is. Imagine it were the case that instead
of sperm and ovum each providing half of the genetic material
for the new organism, one of these provided all the DNA and
the other provided either only nutrition or an impulse to initiate
cell division. If, for instance, a sperm contained all the genetic
material and required the ovum only for nutrition,³³ then the
relationship between sperm and ovum would be relevantly like
the current relationship between zygote and uterus. In that case,
³³ This was the view held by some ancients, such as Aristotle, who thought that
the sperm was a homunculus and that the female contribution was only to gestate it.

 ∼ Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View

() above could be said to be the victim of contraception, and
thus contraception would then be wrong on the future-like-ours
argument. Thus the moral issue, on Professor Marquis’s view, rests
on whether sperm is haploid or diploid.
However, it is hard to see how that can make a difference to
whether contraception is morally akin to murder. How, in other
words, can mere genetic individuation make all the difference
between whether or not it is wrong to prevent a future like ours? If
it really is a future like ours that counts, then why should it be the
future of genetically complete organisms? My alternative proposal,
which avoids the odd implication of this, is that what counts is the
valuable future of those entities with morally relevant interests.
Discontinuing the valuable life of a being with morally relevant
interests in that life is (prima facie) wrong.
My account has another advantage over the future-like-ours
account. If the value of a future were all that counted, then it
would be worse to kill a fetus than to kill a thirty-year old. This is
because a fetus, all things being equal, would have a longer future,
and would therefore be deprived of more. The greater deprivation
makes sense when we are comparing the death of a thirty-year old
with that of a nonagenarian, where most people take the former
to be worse. However, it makes much less sense when comparing
the deaths of the fetus and the thirty-year old, where many of us
take the latter to be much worse. The best explanation for this is
that a fetus has not yet acquired the interest in its own existence
that the thirty-year old has. The case of the thirty-year old and the
nonagenarian can be explained in one of two ways. It could be that
both have equal interests in continued life but the nonagenarian
has less life left. Alternatively, in some cases only, it could be that
the nonagenarian’s interest in living has already begun to decline,
perhaps on account of life’s becoming worse with advancing age
and decrepitude.
There are related ways of explaining intuitions about the relative
badness of killing fetuses, young people, and old people. Among
Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View ∼ 

these is Jeff McMahan’s notion of time-relative interests, which
he distinguishes from life interests. The latter ‘are concerned
with what would be better or worse for oneself as a temporally
extended being; they reflect what would be better or worse
for one’s life as a whole’.³⁴ Time-relative interests, by contrast,
are one’s interests at a particular time—that which ‘one has
egoistic reason to care about’³⁵ at a particular time. These
two kinds of interests are coextensive in so far as identity
is the basis for egoistic concern. However, because Professor
McMahan (following Professor Parfit)³⁶ thinks that psychological
continuity is more important than identity, life interests and timerelative interests diverge. Arising from each of these interests are
competing accounts of the badness of death. Following the ‘Life
Comparative Account’ a death is worse to the extent that the total
value of the life it ends is less than it otherwise would have been.³⁷
On this account the death of the fetus is much worse than the death
of the thirty-year old because the total value of the fetus’s life is less
than the value of the life of one who dies at age thirty. However,
on the ‘Time Relative Interest Account’ the badness of death is
assessed in terms of the victim’s time-relative interests.³⁸ Professor
McMahan prefers this account, in part because it explains why the
death of the thirty-year old is worse than the death of the fetus.³⁹
The fetus is not prudentially connected to its future self—its future
like ours—whereas the thirty-year old is.

C O N C LU S I O N S
My view that fetuses lack moral standing in the earlier stages of
pregnancy is common among advocates of the pro-choice position,
³⁴ McMahan, Jeff, The Ethics of Killing: Problems at the Margins of Life (New York:
Oxford University Press, ) .
³⁵ Ibid.
³⁶ Derek Parfit, Reasons and Persons, Part .
³⁷ McMahan, Jeff, The Ethics of Killing, .
³⁸ Ibid.
³⁹ Ibid. ,  ff.

 ∼ Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View

although it may be less commonly held that fetuses lack any moral
standing for quite as long as I have suggested they do. Combining
the view that fetuses lack moral standing in the earlier stages of
pregnancy with the view that it is always a harm to come into
existence turns the prevailing presumptions about abortion on their
head. Instead of a presumption in favour of continuing pregnancy,
we should adopt a presumption, at least in the earlier stages of
pregnancy, against carrying a fetus to term. This is the ‘pro-death’
view of abortion. On this view, it is not any given abortion (in the
earlier stages of pregnancy) that requires justification, but rather
any given failure to abort. For such a failure allows somebody to
suffer the serious harm of coming into existence.
There may be disagreement about just when during pregnancy
a fetus begins to gain moral standing. On the view that consciousness is the appropriate criterion, I have shown that the evidence is
that this would be at quite an advanced gestational age. Those who
think that the earliest interests in continuing to exist are strong,
may think it best, on precautionary grounds, to treat fetuses as
having rudimentary moral standing somewhat earlier than that.
That would provide a buffer against mistakenly thwarting such an
interest. Those who think that the earliest interests in continued
existence are weak and that suffering of an ordinary life is very
bad, may see no need to regard younger fetuses as having any
moral standing. I shall not settle these issues. It seems to me that
reasonable people could disagree about the fine evaluative calibrations that would be required to make such judgements. Given
that the overwhelming majority of abortions do and could take
place well before consciousness arises, I need only conclude that
there would be something problematic about willingly or negligently delaying an abortion until the gestation had advanced to the
moral grey area.
My argument has not been simply that pregnant women are
entitled to have an abortion (in the earlier stages). I have argued
for the stronger claim that abortion (during these stages) would
Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View ∼ 

be preferable to carrying the fetus to term. This is not the same as
arguing that abortions should be forced on people. As I showed
in Chapter , at least for now we ought to recognize a legal right
to reproductive freedom. These arguments apply with at least as
much (if not more) force to a freedom not to abort as they do
to a freedom to conceive. Thus my conclusions should be viewed
as recommendations about how a pregnant woman should make
use of the freedom to choose whether or not to abort. I am
recommending that she does abort and that she needs excellent
reason not to. It should be clear that I do not think that there is any
such reason.
The pro-death view should be of interest even to those who do
not accept it. One of its valuable features is that it offers a unique
challenge to those pro-lifers who reject a legal right to abortion.⁴⁰
Whereas a legal pro-choice position does not require a pro-lifer
to have an abortion—it allows a choice—a legal pro-life position
does prevent a pro-choicer from having an abortion. Those who
think that the law should embody the pro-life position might want
to ask themselves what they would say about a lobby group that,
contrary to my arguments in Chapter  but in accordance with
pro-lifers’ commitment to the restriction of procreative freedom,
recommended that the law become pro-death. A legal pro-death
policy would require even pro-lifers to have abortions. Faced with
this idea, legal pro-lifers might have a newfound interest in the
value of choice.
⁴⁰ Lest it be thought that all pro-lifers, by definition, oppose a legal right to abortion, I should note that one can embrace the pro-life position as the correct moral
position, but think that people should nonetheless have a legal right to choose.
The distinction is between one’s personal moral views and what one thinks the
law should say.

 ∼ Abortion: The ‘Pro-Death’ View


Population and Extinction
If children were brought into the world by an act of pure
reason alone, would the human race continue to exist?
Arthur Schopenhauer¹

Trillions of conscious beings inhabit our planet. Exponentially
more have already lived. How many more lives there still will
be remains an open question. Eventually, however, all life will
come to an end. Whether this happens sooner or later is one factor
that will influence how many more lives there will be. Until then
numerous factors will influence the number of beings populating
the earth. In the case of humans, the reproductive decisions (or
their absence) of individual people, and the population policies (or
their absence) of states and international bodies, will play a role.²
In this chapter, I shall examine two connected sets of questions.
The first set concerns population and the second set concerns
extinction. The central question of population—one that has
enjoyed considerable philosophical attention—is ‘How many
people should there be?’ By now it should be unsurprising that my
¹ Schopenhauer, Arthur, ‘On the Sufferings of the World’, in Complete Essays of
Schopenhauer, trans. T. Bailey Saunders,  (New York: Wiley Book Company, ) .
² Humans also play a role in deciding how many animals there will be, most
obviously in situations in which humans breed animals and in situations in which
humans (can) sterilize animals.

answer to this question is ‘zero’. Although there are some people
who would take this answer to be correct (including some who
think that it is obviously so), there are many more who take my
answer to be obviously wrong. Part of my aim, therefore, will be
to show that my ‘zero’ answer deserves more serious consideration
than it typically receives. To this end, I shall show how it resolves
the conundrums of philosophical theory about population.
The central question about extinction, as applied to humans, is
‘Is the prospect of human extinction something to be regretted?’
I shall answer that although the process of extinction may be
regrettable, and although the prospect of human extinction may, in
some ways, be bad for us, it would be better, all things considered,
if there were no more people (and indeed no more conscious life).
A secondary question about extinction is whether, given the fact
of future extinction, it would be better if this came earlier or later.
Here I shall argue that although very imminent extinction would
be worse for us, earlier extinction nonetheless would be better
than later extinction. This is because earlier extinction guarantees
against the significant harm of future lives that would otherwise be
started. I shall show, however, that on some views, the creation of
a limited number of new people may be justified. If that is so, then
although extinction need not come as early as it could it should
still come earlier rather than later. Accordingly, even this more
modest conclusion is deeply antagonistic to the more common,
sentimental view that it would be best, all things being equal, if
humans continued to exist for as long as possible.
Although the population and extinction questions are connected, they are distinct. One reason for this is that population size
and time-until-extinction need not correlate. Obviously the longer
there are humans the more humans there could be, but it does
not follow that the longer there are humans the more humans
there will be. Varying the time until extinction is one variable
that can influence the number of people, but varying the rate of
reproduction is another. Thus, if we imagine extinction occurring
 ∼ Population and Extinction

about twelve years from now, as a result perhaps of the impact
of an asteroid that suddenly makes the planet uninhabitable, there
would be, at present rates of reproduction, approximately a further billion people before the end of Homo Sapiens. If the rate
of reproduction were halved, the time to extinction could be
doubled—the asteroid hits two dozen years from now, rather than
half that—without the total number of future people increasing.
The relationship between the number of people and the time to
extinction need not be coincidental. It could be interactive. Thus,
we can imagine circumstances in which making fewer humans
ensures that there are humans for a longer time. Perhaps having
too many humans would start a war that brought about the end of
the species.

OV E R P O P U L AT I O N
At the time this is being written, there are about . billion people
alive.³ Very many people think that this is too many—that we
already have an overpopulation problem. Others think that unless
we do something about population growth (or unless something is
done to it), there will very soon be far too many people. Even those
who do not think that the population sizes projected for the next
century or two would be too big certainly think that there is some
population size that would be too large. Nobody can reasonably
deny that there is some population that would be too large, or, in
other words that there could be overpopulation.
The notion of overpopulation is normative, not descriptive or
predictive. There never will be more people than there could be,⁴
but there may well be more people than there should be. But
how big a population is overpopulation? This question can be
asked of either (a) the cumulative population or (b) a population
³ A billion is ,,,.
⁴ However, there may be more people than there could be for very long.

Population and Extinction ∼ 

at any given time. The latter question—how many people may
there be at any given time?—is the usual one. This is because
the number of people living at any one time can impact on the
welfare of those (and later) people,⁵ or (some environmentalists
would argue) impact on the planet. Anthropocentrically, there
may not be enough food to go around, or the world may simply
become too crowded. Environmentally, the ecological ‘footprint’
of a very large human population may be too great.⁶ Thus the
usual concern is to avoid having too many people around at one
time or within some specified period. That is a reasonable concern.
However, as I have indicated, we can also ask the population
question about the cumulative population—how many people
may there be throughout time?⁷ In so far as most people can make
sense of this question, it is a function of the concurrent population,
the (possible) duration of humanity, and the circumstances of each
period of humanity. In other words, their answer to the question
‘How many people may there be throughout time?’ is calculated
by summing,⁸ for every consecutive period of humanity’s possible
duration, the answers to the question ‘How many people may
there be within this period?’ However, as I shall show, the question
about cumulative population size can be asked and answered in
other ways.
My argument that coming into existence is always a great harm,
implies a radical answer to the population question (in both of its
forms). It suggests that a cumulative population numbering only
one person would have been overpopulation. This is not because
there would have been too many people for the earth, or too many
people to be sustained by the earth. Instead it is because coming
⁵ See, for example, Kates, Carol A., ‘Reproductive Liberty and Overpopulation’,
Environmental Values,  () –.
⁶ The ecological footprint is obviously not only a function of population size, but
also of the per capita impact. A small human population can make a big impact on
the environment.
⁷ Those who ask this question often phrase this question as follows: ‘How many
people should there ever be?’ (e.g., Derek Parfit, Reasons and Persons, ).
⁸ In ways that take account of overlapping populations.

 ∼ Population and Extinction

into existence is a serious harm—and one such serious harm would
have been one too many.
In fact, however, by my standards there have been already billions too many humans. Determining how many billions is a difficult matter. When, for example, do we start counting? To know
how many humans there have been we need to know for how
long there have been humans, and there is obvious scientific disagreement, within a certain range, about this.⁹ We also need to
know, but do not know, how many humans there were for much
of human history. However, on one influential assessment there
have been well in excess of  billion people.¹⁰ Nearly  per cent
of those people are alive today.¹¹ The early human population was
small. One author suggests that a ‘combination of ecological reasoning and anthropological observation indicates that the savannahs
of eastern and southern Africa [where humans originated] would
have supported approximately , early humans.’¹² By about
, years ago and the advent of agriculture, the human population had increased to an estimated  million.¹³ It grew to  million
by the dawn of the industrial revolution.¹⁴ Growth of the world
human population sped up considerably since then. It took over a
century (–) to increase from  billion to  billion, but each
subsequent billion took less and less time— years for the third
billion in ,  years for the fourth billion in ,  years for the
fifth billion in , and  years for the sixth billion in .¹⁵
⁹ I here ignore the obviously false view of the crudest creationists that there have
only been humans for close on , years.
¹⁰ Carl Haub, ‘How Many People Have Ever Lived on Earth?’, originally published
in Population Today in February . My statistic comes from an updated version on the web: <http://www.prb.org/Content/ContentGroups/PTarticle/OctDec/How Many People Have Ever Lived on Earth .htm> (accessed  October ).
¹¹ Ibid.
¹² McMichael, Anthony, Human Frontiers, Environments and Disease (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, ) .
¹³ Ibid.
¹⁴ Ibid.
¹⁵ <http://www.peopleandplanet.net> (accessed  October ).

Population and Extinction ∼ 

Although it would have been better had none of the more
than  billion people come into existence, these people (among
whom you and I are included) can no longer be prevented. For
this reason, many might wish to focus on the question how many
more people there may be—in the cumulative sense, rather than at
some specified time in the future. The ideal answer here is again
‘zero’, although that ideal is being violated about every second.¹⁶

S O LV I N G P RO B L E M S I N M O R A L T H E O RY
A B O U T P O P U L AT I O N
My argument that coming into existence is always a serious harm,
if accepted, provides an interesting solution to a set of problems
in moral theory about population. Some authors have seen the
view that there should be no more people not as a solution to
such problems, but instead as another of the problems. That,
however, is because they have considered only the conclusion
that there should be no more people rather than the argument
for this conclusion. In other words, as I shall show, it has been
noted that some moral theories imply that there should be no
more people, and then the theory has been rejected on the grounds
that it has such an (allegedly outrageous) implication. However,
now that I have given an independent argument for the view that
there should be no more people, it should be seen that it is not a
weakness but rather a strength of a moral theory that it has this
implication.

Professor Parfit’s population problems
The locus classicus of moral theorizing about population is Part 
of Derek Parfit’s Reasons and Persons. His discussion is long
¹⁶ At present the human population increases by , people a day (and this is
after the daily deaths are counted).

 ∼ Population and Extinction

and complex and thus not every feature of it can be presented
here. However, I shall provide a brief outline of his central
arguments before showing what bearing my arguments have on
his discussion.
Professor Parfit discusses the non-identity problem. This problem, it will be recalled from my discussion in Chapter , arises
where the only alternative to bringing about a poor quality life is
not bringing about that life at all. The non-identity problem is the
problem of explaining the common judgement that starting such
a life is wrong. Professor Parfit argues that what he calls ‘personaffecting’ views of morality cannot explain why starting such a life
is wrong. A person-affecting view is one that morally assesses an
action in terms of how it affects people. In his first statement of
the person-affecting view, Professor Parfit describes it as the view
that ‘it is bad if people are affected for the worse.’¹⁷ Such a view,
he says, cannot solve the non-identity problem because in nonidentity cases those who are brought into existence cannot be worse
off than they would otherwise have been, because they would not
otherwise have been.
It is the person-affecting view’s alleged inability to solve the
non-identity problem that sets Professor Parfit off on his hunt for
the elusive Theory X, a theory that must solve the non-identity
problem while avoiding other problems generated along the way.
Because he believes that person-affecting views cannot solve the
non-identity problem, he considers the alternative—impersonal
views. Whereas person-affecting views maintain that something
can only be bad if it is worse for somebody, impersonal views
are not concerned about the effects on particular people. Instead
they examine outcomes more impersonally. If people’s lives go
better in one possible outcome than the other, then the better
outcome is to be preferred even though nobody is better off in that
scenario.
¹⁷ Parfit, Derek, Reasons and Persons, .

Population and Extinction ∼ 

This view can explain why it is wrong to bring into existence a
person who will have a poor quality life. It is wrong because that
outcome is worse than the alternative outcome in which that person is not brought into existence. It does not matter, on the impersonal view, that the person brought into existence is not worse off
than he would otherwise have been. It is enough that the outcome
in which he comes into existence is worse (impersonally) than the
outcome in which he does not come into existence. In other words,
an impersonal view can solve the non-identity problem.
The impersonal view, however, cannot be Theory X, because
although it solves the non-identity problem, it has serious problems
of its own. To understand why this is so, we must distinguish two
kinds of impersonal view:
Impersonal Total View:
‘If other things are equal, the best outcome is the one in which
there would be the greatest quantity of whatever makes life
worth living.’¹⁸
Impersonal Average View:
‘If other things are equal, the best outcome is the one in which
people’s lives go, on average, best.’¹⁹
Consider first the problem with the impersonal total view. On this
view, a smaller population with a higher quality of life is worse than
a larger population with a smaller quality of life so long as there
are enough extra people in the larger population to outweigh the
lower quality of life. Derek Parfit represents these two worlds as
shown in Figure ..²⁰
In these diagrams, the width of the bar corresponds to the number of people and the height to the quality of life. The A-population
is very small but has a high quality of life. The Z-population is very
¹⁸ Parfit, Derek, Reasons and Persons, .
¹⁹ Ibid. .
²⁰ Ibid. . He represents a range of intermediate worlds as well. The components
of the diagram included here are reproduced by permission of Oxford University
Press.

 ∼ Population and Extinction

A

Z

Figure 6.1.

large, but has a low quality of life. Indeed, life in Z is barely worth
living. However, the total amount of goodness in Z is greater than
the total amount of goodness in A. Thus, Z is better, according to
the impersonal total view. This is so even though the people in the
more populous world lead lives of a lower quality. The conclusion
that Z is better than A, Derek Parfit rightly suggests, is repugnant.
Hence he terms it the ‘Repugnant Conclusion’.²¹
The impersonal average view avoids the Repugnant Conclusion
because that view requires that the total good in a world be divided
by the number of people in the world, in order to determine
the average well-being. In the more populous world, the average
quality of life is much, much lower. It is worse, therefore, than the
less populous world.
²¹ Ibid. . Not everybody views this conclusion as repugnant. Torbjörn Tännsjö,
for example, thinks that most people lead lives that are only just worth living. When
we rise above this level we do so only briefly. If people recognized that the
quality of life in Z was the same quality as their lives, they would not accept
that the Repugnant Conclusion really is repugnant. (See his Hedonistic Utilitarianism
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, ) –. See also his ‘Doom Soon?’,
Inquiry, /, () –.) Although I shall not engage Professor Tännsjö’s views
directly, arguments I have already advanced and others I shall still provide show
what is wrong with his argument.

Population and Extinction ∼ 

Although the impersonal average view also solves the nonidentity problem, it too cannot be Theory X, for it faces other
problems. To show why this is the case, Derek Parfit asks us to
imagine another two worlds. In the first world everybody had a
very high quality of life. In the second world, in addition to all
these people with their same high quality of life there are additional
people who, although not quite as well off, nonetheless have lives
that are well worth living. These sorts of cases, Derek Parfit calls
‘Mere Addition’. More specifically, mere addition occurs ‘when, in
one of two outcomes, there exist extra people () who have lives
worth living, () who affect no one else, and () whose existence
does not involve social injustice’.²²
Now the impersonal average view says that the second world is
worse, because the average quality of life is lower. It is made lower
by the mere addition of extra people who, although happy, are not
quite as happy as the original people are. Derek Parfit takes this
to be implausible. It would entail, he says, that it would be worse
if in addition to Adam and Eve leading blissful lives, there were a
billion extra people who lived lives of slightly lower quality. The
impersonal average view also entails, he says, that whether it is
wrong to have any given child depends on facts about the quality
of all previous lives. Thus, if ‘the ancient Egyptians had a very high
quality of life, it is more likely to be bad to have a child now’.²³ But,
says Professor Parfit, ‘research in Egyptology cannot be relevant to
our decision whether to have children.’²⁴ Accordingly, he takes the
impersonal average view to be implausible.

Why anti-natalism is compatible with Theory X
If my arguments are taken seriously, then a number of Professor
Parfit’s problems can be overcome. First, I argued in Chapter 
that the non-identity problem can be solved. One way in which I
²² Parfit, Derek, Reasons and Persons, .
²³ Ibid.
²⁴ Ibid.

 ∼ Population and Extinction

said this might be done is by employing Joel Feinberg’s argument
that coming into existence can be worse for that person than never
existing. Alternatively, I argued, we can say that even if coming
into existence is not worse, it may still be bad for the person who
comes into existence. Since the alternative is not bad we can say
that the person is thereby harmed. This alternative argument may
seem inadequate if the person-affecting view is understood, as I
have suggested so far, as the view that something ‘is bad if people
are affected for the worse’.²⁵ However, that first formulation of
Derek Parfit’s is more restrictive than it need be. When he later
distinguishes two kinds of person-affecting principles—the narrow
and the wide—he describes one of them as follows:
The Narrow Person-Affecting View:
‘An outcome is worse for people (in the narrow sense) if the
occurrence of X rather than Y would be either worse, or bad,
for the X-people.’²⁶
The reason why Professor Parfit thinks that addition of an ‘or bad’
clause cannot solve the non-identity problem is that he thinks it is
not bad for people to come into existence so long as they have a
life worth living. However, I have explicated an ambiguity in the
phrase ‘a life worth living’, noting that it might mean either ‘a life
worth starting’ or ‘a life worth continuing’. Keeping this distinction
in mind and considering the argument that coming into existence
is always a harm, it follows that no lives are worth starting (even
if some lives are worth continuing). Thus coming into existence is
always bad for a person even if one thinks that it is not worse for
that person.
Given that a person-affecting view is indeed able to solve the
non-identity problem, there is no need to appeal to an impersonal
view to solve it. Some may see my arguments as bolstering the
case against the impersonal view. The repugnant conclusion, for
²⁵ Ibid.  (emphasis added).
²⁶ Ibid.  (emphasis added).

Population and Extinction ∼ 

example, is even more repugnant on my view than it is on the view
that, all things being equal, it is good to have extra lives. On my
view, adding extra lives is worse (because it increases the number
of people harmed), and especially when those extra lives are barely
worth continuing. The more populous world with poorer quality
lives is, in every way, worse than the less populous world with
better quality lives.
Others might suggest that if the impersonal total view takes
account of my argument it can avoid the repugnant conclusion.
My argument may be seen to explain that the repugnant conclusion arises because of the mistaken assumption that it is good to
have extra lives that are worth continuing. The impersonal total
view can be revised to avoid both this mistake and the resultant
conclusion. One way in which this can be done is to restrict the
scope of the impersonal total view in such a way that it applies only
to people who do exist or will anyway exist and not to questions
about how many people should exist. In other words, it can be seen
as a principle to maximize the happiness of the existent, but not to
affect the number of existers. This revision, however, comes at an
obvious cost. The revised view ceases to provide guidance on how
many people there should be.
My arguments also shed some light on the impersonal average
view. This view, it will be recalled, faces the (alleged) problem of
mere addition.²⁷ That is to say, the impersonal average view says
that we should not add extra lives if they lower the average wellbeing of all humans who have ever lived. The implication that
additional lives ‘worth living’—read ‘worth continuing’—should
not be added is taken to be implausible. My arguments, however,
show that it is not. If no lives are worth starting, it is not a defect
²⁷ Derek Parfit goes on to describe not merely a Mere Addition problem, but a
Mere Addition paradox. For the sake of simplicity, I shall not venture on to discuss
the paradox. My comments on the Mere Addition problem can be extrapolated to
the paradox. For those familiar with the paradox, my solution is to deny that Derek
Parfit’s A+ is not worse than A. On my view A+ is definitely worse than A, because
it involves extra lives (and thus extra harm).

 ∼ Population and Extinction

in a theory that it precludes adding new lives that are not worth
starting, even if those lives would be worth continuing. It would
indeed have been better if no people had been added to the Edenic
lives of Adam and Eve.
However, this is not to support the impersonal average view, for
on this view we would be obliged to start new lives if it would raise
the average quality of life of all people who have every lived. This
is at odds with my conclusion and it would still imply that Egyptology is relevant to our procreative decisions. As with the impersonal total view, the impersonal average view is concerned about how
much good there is and not with how well off people are. Both
impersonal views make the mistake of valuing people only to the
extent that they increase (total or average) happiness. They mistakenly assume that the value of happiness is primary and the value
of persons is derivative from this. However, as I noted in Chapter ,
it is not the case that people are valuable because they add extra
happiness. Instead extra happiness is valuable because it is good for
people—because it makes people’s lives go better.
The total and average impersonal views can be revised in a way
that this mistake does no harm. This is another way of avoiding
their respective problems—the repugnant conclusion and the
mere addition problem. Under this revision, the impersonal views
seek not the greatest total or average happiness but rather
the smallest total or average unhappiness. In other words, the
revised impersonal views seek to minimize the total or average
unhappiness. This way of revising the impersonal views has two
advantages. First, it preserves the impersonal view’s ability to
provide guidance on how many people there should be. Secondly,
it generates the conclusion for which I have argued—namely
that the ideal population size is ‘zero’. The way to minimize
unhappiness is for there to be no people (or other conscious
beings). The lowest total unhappiness and the lowest average
unhappiness are both zero unhappiness, and zero unhappiness, at
least in the real world, is achieved by having zero people.
Population and Extinction ∼ 

Those who wish, at this point, to resurrect the repugnant conclusion and mere addition problems by imagining a world in which
no lives contain any bad but differ only in how much good they
contain face a number of problems. First, it is not clear that we can
even make sense of such a world, given the interaction between
the good and bad in a life. As I showed in Chapter , a life that contained very little good would have to contain some bad—namely
the tedium of long stretches of absent goods. The only way this
could be avoided would be if the life’s duration were shortened,
but the shortening of life is another bad.
If we assume that this problem can be overcome, then a
second one arises. Consider first the repugnant conclusion. What
is repugnant about the repugnant conclusion is the suggestion
(entailed by the impersonal total view) that a world filled with lives
barely worth living is better than a world containing many fewer
lives of much greater quality. But how could lives be barely worth
living (read ‘worth continuing’) if they contained no bad—and the
absence of more good were not bad? In other words, how can a
life containing only good and no bad be barely worth continuing?
If the lives in Z are actually quite well worth living then preferring
Z over A is no longer repugnant (even if one thinks that it is still
mistaken).
Consider mere addition next. It is true that if future possible
lives were known to contain no bad, even the unhappinessminimizing version of the impersonal average view could not
rule out mere addition. However, the question is whether this
would be problematic. Much of the reason why mere addition is
seen as a problem is that the average impersonal view’s rejection
of mere addition runs counter to an implicit assumption that it
is good to have extra lives that are worth living. The average
impersonal view says that it can be bad to have extra lives
that are worth living (if these extra lives lower average wellbeing). Where lives contain some bad I have shown that my
argument says that the impersonal average view is right to reject
 ∼ Population and Extinction

mere addition. Although my argument does not show that the
impersonal average view is right to reject mere addition in cases
where the extra lives contain no bad, it helps nevertheless to
overcome the problem. Remember that, following my argument
in Chapter , a (hypothetical) life that contains some good but
no bad is not worse than never existing—but neither is it any
better than never existing. Following my argument, there is no
way to choose between (a) never existing and (b) coming into
existence with a life that contains no bad whatsoever. This makes
the impersonal average view’s judgement of mere addition less
implausible. If it is better to have extra lives worth living and the
impersonal average view suggests that it is worse, then there is a
serious problem. However, if on one criterion, there is no way of
choosing in favour of or against mere addition, and the impersonal
average view suggests we choose against, then there need not
be any contradiction. The impersonal average view can be seen
as layering a further (impersonal) condition upon a judgement
that mere addition is neither better nor worse for those who are
added.
In addition to solving the non-identity problem and avoiding
both the repugnant conclusion and the mere addition problem, my
argument that coming into existence is always a harm also explains
‘The Asymmetry’:
While it would be wrong to have a child that would have a life not worth
continuing, there is no moral reason to have a child that would have a life
well worth continuing.²⁸

Given that coming into existence is always a harm (even if that life
would be worth continuing), there can never be a moral reason to
have a child—or, at least, no all-things-considered moral reason.
²⁸ This wording of the asymmetry is an adaptation of Derek Parfit’s formulation
(p. ), which would require familiarity with his ‘Wretched Child’ and ‘Happy Child’
examples. My formulation also avoids problems with the ambiguity in the phrase ‘a
life worth living’.

Population and Extinction ∼ 

(There may be a pro tanto reason²⁹ —such as the interest of the prospective parents.)
My argument that coming into existence is always a harm thus
does much of what Derek Parfit says that Theory X needs to do. It
.
.
.
.

solves the non-identity problem;
avoids the repugnant conclusion;
avoids the mere addition problem; and
explains the asymmetry.

This is not to suggest that my view is Theory X. Mine is an argument only about whether there should be more people, whereas
Theory X is a general theory about morality that can also deal satisfactorily with population questions. However, the fact that my
argument, unlike so many others, appears compatible with Theory
X in all these ways provides some further grounds for taking my
argument seriously, even though for many people its conclusion is
radically counter-intuitive.

Contractarianism
Whether contractarianism³⁰ could provide guidance about how
many people there should be is a matter of dispute. Derek Parfit
thinks that it cannot fulfil this function.
On the ideal contractarian view, principles of justice are chosen
in what John Rawls calls the ‘original position’—a hypothetical
position in which impartiality is ensured by denying parties in
the position knowledge of particular facts about themselves. The
²⁹ This is Shelly Kagan’s term. By it he means a reason that ‘has genuine weight,
but nonetheless may be outweighed by other considerations’. He distinguishes it
from the more commonly used ‘prima facie reason’, which he takes to ‘involve an
epistemological qualification’ which ‘appears to be a reason, but may actually not
be a reason at all, or may not have weight in all cases it appears to’. (The Limits of
Morality (Oxford: Clarendon Press, ) .)
³⁰ Here I consider only ideal contractarianism—the view that morality consists
in those principles that would be chosen under some ideal set of circumstances—as
this is the dominant and most plausible version of contractarianism.

 ∼ Population and Extinction

problem, however, says Derek Parfit, is that parties in the original
position must know that they exist. But to assume, when choosing
principles that affect future people, that we shall certainly exist,
he says, ‘is like assuming, when choosing a principle that would
disadvantage women, that we shall certainly be men’.³¹ This is a
problem because it is essential to ideal contractarianism ‘that we
do not know whether we would bear the brunt of some chosen
principle’.³²
Now the problem with this objection to contractarianism is that
the analogy does not hold, and it does not hold because only
existers can ‘bear the brunt’ of any principle. A principle that results
in some possible people never becoming actual does not impose
any costs on those people. Nobody is disadvantaged by not coming
into existence. Rivka Weinberg makes the same point in a different
way. She says that ‘existence is not a distributable benefit’ and
thus neither ‘people in general nor individuals in particular will be
disadvantaged by the assumption of an existent perspective’.³³
Those who are unsatisfied with this response might wish to consider whether the original position could be altered in such a way
that parties to it do not know whether they will exist. Derek Parfit
thinks that such a change cannot be made. This, he says, is because
while we ‘can imagine a different possible history, in which we
never existed . . . we cannot assume that, in the actual history of
the world, it might be true that we never exist’.³⁴ But it is not clear
to me why this explains why possible people cannot be parties
to the original position. Why must parties in the original position
be people in ‘the actual history of the world’? Why can we not
imagine instead that they are possible people? Some may object
that it is metaphysically too fanciful to think of possible people
inhabiting an original position. However, the whole point about
³¹ Parfit, Derek, Reasons and Persons, .
³² Ibid.
³³ Weinberg, Rivka M., ‘Procreative Justice: A Contractualist Account’, Public
Affairs Quarterly, / () .
³⁴ Parfit, Derek, Reasons and Persons, .

Population and Extinction ∼ 

the original position is that it is a hypothetical position, not an actual one. Why might we not imagine hypothetical people inhabiting
a hypothetical position? Professor Rawls’s theory is intended to be
‘political not metaphysical’³⁵ and the original position, he emphasized, is but an expository device to determine fair principles of
justice. These are principles that it would be rational to adopt were
we truly impartial.
What size population would be produced by principles chosen
by parties in the original position? This obviously depends on a
variety of features of the original position. If we admit possible
people to the original position, but hold constant all other features
of that position, as Professor Rawls describes it, we find that
the chosen principles would produce my ideal population—zero.
Professor Rawls says that parties to the original position would
maximize the position of the worst off—that is, they would
maximize the minimum—so-called ‘maximin’. Many writers
agree that when applied to questions of population size, this would
imply that there should be no people.³⁶ This is because, as long
as procreation continues, some of those people who are brought
into being will lead lives that are not worth living (read ‘worth
continuing’). The only way to improve their position is not to
bring such people into existence, and the only way to guarantee
that such people are not brought into existence is not to bring
anybody into existence.
Michael Bayles thinks that maximin produces this conclusion
only if it is utilities that are being distributed. If it is primary
goods—goods that are needed to secure all other goods—he says
that the opposite conclusion would be produced. He says that the
‘worst off are the nonexistent, for they do not receive any primary
³⁵ Rawls, John, ‘Justice as Fairness: Political not Metaphysical’, Philosophy and
Public Affairs, / ().
³⁶ Rivka Weinberg, for example, says that ‘Maxi-Min would lead to a procreative
ban since no procreation is better than being born with an incurable disease that
makes life not worth living.’ (‘Procreative Justice: A Contractualist Account’, .)

 ∼ Population and Extinction

goods. The next worse off class consists of those who may or may
not exist, and if they exist they will receive some primary goods.
Consequently one should bring as many people as possible into
existence.’³⁷
Underlying this line of reasoning is the mistaken assumption
that the non-existent can be badly off on account of absent goods.
However, we saw in Chapter  (Fig. ., quadrant ) that absent
goods are not bad if there is nobody who is deprived by their
absence. Thus the non-existent are not the worst off. Indeed, my
argument shows that existers are always worse off on account
of existing and thus maximin does indeed suggest that zero
population is the optimum size.
Those who have seen this implication of maximin for population questions have taken it to be grounds for rejecting maximin.
That is, they take the implication to be a reductio ad absurdum of
maximin. My arguments suggest that that dismissal is mistaken.³⁸
Those who reject the implication of maximin often think that it
matters what the probability of a bad outcome is, and thus parties
in the original position should be able to reason probabilistically.
Professor Rawls imposes a condition on the original position that
prevents this. My arguments show that, for population questions,
it makes no difference whether parties in the original position may
reason probabilistically or not. This is because it is always very bad
to come into existence. Thus the probability of a bad outcome
is one hundred per cent. How bad the outcome is—very, very,
very bad or just very bad—is a matter of probability. However,
that does not matter in the current context, given that one already
knows that any outcome in which one exists holds no advantages
for oneself over an outcome in which one does not. Thus even
³⁷ Bayles, Michael, Morality and Population Policy (University of Alabama Press,
) .
³⁸ However, more can be said about this. The reductio argument is advanced not
only against maximin but also against my conclusion that coming into existence is
always a harm. I shall say more about this in the opening section of Chapter .

Population and Extinction ∼ 

those who think that (a) probabilities should be taken into account,
(b) the interests of parents and children should be balanced, and
(c) procreation should be permitted ‘only when it would not be
irrational’³⁹ will be led to the same conclusion as those who choose
to maximin. If my argument is right, it is always irrational to prefer
to come into existence. Rational impartial parties would choose
not to exist and the upshot of this is zero population.

PHASED EXTINCTION
I have shown that my arguments help to solve a number of
notorious problems in moral theory about population. Indeed a
number of these problems arise precisely because of a failure to
recognize that coming into existence is always a serious harm.
However, although my view helps to solve those population
problems that are usually discussed, it faces other problems of its
own. I turn now to consider these and to show how they might be
solved.
My answer to the question ‘How many people should there be?’
is ‘zero’. That is to say, I do not think that there should ever have
been any people. Given that there have been people, I do not think
that there should be any more. But this ‘zero’ answer, I said earlier, is an ideal answer. Do any features of the non-ideal real world
permit a less austere answer?

When decreasing population decreases quality of life
The population problems that we have looked at so far have
involved creating extra people. The non-identity problem was
a problem of explaining why creating some person was wrong.
The repugnant conclusion arises in cases where adding extra lives
³⁹ ‘Procreative Justice: A Contractualist Account’, .

 ∼ Population and Extinction

lowers the quality of life. The mere addition problem arises from
the ‘mere addition’ of extra people who have ‘lives worth living’.
My arguments solve these problems by showing that none of these
extra people should be brought about.
The problems my argument generates arise not from the creation of extra people but rather from failing to create extra people.
For many people the extinction that would result from universal
acceptance of my view is the biggest such problem. Later in this
chapter I shall argue against this view, showing that there is nothing regrettable about some future state in which there are no more
people. Instead the population problem that I believe poses a greater challenge is the path to extinction rather than extinction itself.
In our heavily populated world, we are accustomed to thinking
of increased population being correlated with decreased quality
of life. However, it is also possible, in other circumstances, for a
decrease in population to be correlated with decreased quality of
life. This can occur in one of two related ways. If a population
shrinks too rapidly and it does so as result of a lower birth rate
(rather than a higher death rate, particularly of older people),
quality of life can be reduced because a larger proportion of the
population is non-productive on account of its advanced age. In
such cases, the younger adult people cannot produce enough to
sustain the previous quality of life for the entire population. In such
cases, it is not the absolute size of the reduced population that
causes the lower quality of life. Instead it is the ratio of young to
old people that results from a population reduction induced by a
falling birth rate.
The other, related way in which decreasing population can
decrease quality of life is not when one generation is merely
relatively less populous than the one before it, but rather when
the size of a new generation falls beneath one of a number of
thresholds. In such cases, the absolute (and not merely the relative)
size of the population is so small that quality of life is decreased.
Consider an extreme case, around the lowest threshold. Adam
Population and Extinction ∼ 

and Eve are the only people who ever live. (Cain, Abel, and Seth
are never born.) Adam dies and widowed Eve is left without any
human company.⁴⁰ Eve’s quality of life is reduced not because the
human population is now fifty per cent of what it was before,
but because it has fallen beneath some threshold—in this case the
threshold necessary for company. Had she had children she would
at least have had some human company after Adam’s death.
Bringing people into existence always inflicts serious harm
on those people. However, in some situations failing to bring
people into existence can make the lives of existent people a lot
worse than they would otherwise have been. That is cause for
concern. However, we need to avoid a protracted regress in which
more and more harm is done by the addition of successive new
generations in order to prevent extra harm to existing people.
Thus, the creation of new generations could only possibly be
acceptable, on my view, if it were aimed at phasing out people.
Unless humanity ends suddenly, the final people whether they
exist sooner or later, will likely suffer much.⁴¹ There is some sense
in making sure that fewer people suffer this fate. This can be done
by steadily reducing the number of people. I am under no illusions.
Although humans may voluntarily seek to reduce their number,
they will never, under current circumstances, do so with the intention of moving towards extinction. Thus, in considering the question of phased extinction from a large population base, I am not
discussing what will ever happen but only what should happen or
what it would be best to have happen. Put another way, I am discussing the theoretical implications and applications of my views.
Imagine two possible populations in the near future, as represented in Figure ..
⁴⁰ In any event, she has fallen out with the snake.
⁴¹ Given that procreators are not deterred from procreating by the suffering that
their own children will endure, it should be unsurprising that they are not deterred
by the suffering of the final people in the more distant future. However if it transpires
that the suffering of the final people is great enough, those people might wish that
their parents and earlier ancestors had created new people.

 ∼ Population and Extinction

0
1

–10

2

1

–20
–30
–40
–50
–60

A

B

Figure 6.2.

As in Figure ., the width (that is, along the horizontal axis) of
 and  represents population size, with wider (and additional)
shapes representing more people. A is a population that would
exist if procreation continued, but at about seventy-five per cent
of replacement rate. B is the population that would exist if we
ceased procreation with immediate effect. In both futures, all lives
are beneath the zero quality level—by which I mean the level just
above which a life becomes worth starting (and not the level just
above which life becomes worth continuing). This is a departure
from Derek Parfit’s representation in Figure .. Although he does
not think that all lives on the positive scale are worth living (and
thus the baseline of his bars is not the level at which lives become
worth living),⁴² his general assumption is that some lives are worth
living and all these lives have net positive value. Given my views,
all lives are either more bad or less bad, not more good or less
good. This is why I use the negative scale beneath the zero quality
level. The worse the quality of life the lower it extends on the
vertical axis.
The 1-people are the same people in A and B. In A, the 1-people
are those who exist before the -people are brought into existence.
⁴² See his reference to the ‘Bad Level’ in Reasons and Persons, –.

Population and Extinction ∼ 

Bringing the -people into existence makes the lives of the already
existent people much less bad than they would otherwise be. The
absence of the -people in B, makes the lives of the already existent people much worse. But it does not do so for all the -people in
B. This is because some of them will die before the impact of the
absence of -people can be felt. The extent of the harm to the people is determined by how bad their lives are. This is because the
harm of coming into existence is not distinct from the bad in the
life that is started. In other words, how bad a life actually is, is
the same as how bad it is to come into existence with such a life.
In Figure . I assume, for the sake of simplicity, that the new lives
will have the same quality as the previous ones—that is, that they
will be as bad (but not worse) than the lives of the -people in A.
This assumes that the -people are not the final people. If they were
the final people, many of them would lead lives much worse than
the -people in A, which would instead resemble the lives of the people in B. Any full assessment of the ethics of phased extinction
would have to take into account the harms of all generations up
to and including the final people. Here I simplify the question by
focusing only on one new generation.
On the view that the -people are harmed by being brought into
existence, may they nonetheless be brought into existence given
the extent to which their existence makes the lives of some of the
-people less bad? More generally, my anti-natalist view must face
the following questions:
. May we ever create new lives in order to improve the quality
of existent lives?
. If so, under what conditions may we do so?

Reducing population to zero
These questions cannot be answered by the narrow person-affecting view. This, it will be recalled, is the view that:
 ∼ Population and Extinction

‘An outcome is worse for people (in the narrow sense) if the occurrence
of X rather than Y would be either worse, or bad, for the X-people.’⁴³

I showed that this view can solve the non-identity problem. The
narrow person-affecting view can also show why world B in
Figure . is worse for the -people and why world A is worse for
the -people. However, the narrow person-affecting view cannot
answer the two questions before us now. It provides no guidance
on whether we may ever inflict harm by bringing new people
into existence if that will reduce the harm of those who already
exist and, if so, under what conditions we may do so. The narrow
person-affecting view cannot tell us whether we may bring the people into existence if that will reduce the harm of (many of) the
-people.
The wide person-affecting view, by contrast, is able to answer
our two questions and can say whether A is worse than B. However, as I shall show, it cannot answer these questions in a way that
takes seriously the view that coming into existence is always a serious harm.
The Wide Person-Affecting View:
‘An outcome is worse for people (in the wide sense) if the occurrence of X would be less good for the X-people than the
occurrence of Y would be for the Y-people.’⁴⁴
The wide person-affecting view says that we may start new lives in
order to improve the quality of existent lives if the harm suffered
by existing people in the absence of new people would be greater
than the harm done to the new people.
But under what conditions can the one harm be said to be greater than the other? How does one make such comparisons? Derek
Parfit suggests two versions of the wide person-affecting view, each
of which spells out different ways of making the comparison:
⁴³ Parfit, Derek, Reasons and Persons, .
⁴⁴ Ibid. .

Population and Extinction ∼ 

Wide Total Person-Affecting View:
An outcome is worse for people ‘if the total net benefit given
to the X-people by the occurrence of X would be less than
the total net benefit given to the Y-people by the occurrence
of Y’.⁴⁵
Wide Average Person-Affecting View:
An outcome X is worse for people ‘if the average net benefit per
person given to the X-people by the occurrence of X would be
less than the average net benefit per person given to the Ypeople by the occurrence of Y’.⁴⁶
Given that everybody, on my view, is harmed, it may be better to
express these principles in terms of ‘harms’ rather than ‘benefits’—
that is negatively rather than positively:
Negative Wide Total Person-Affecting View:
An outcome is worse for people if the total net harm to the Xpeople by the occurrence of X would be greater than the total
net harm to the Y-people by the occurrence of Y.
Negative Wide Average Person-Affecting View:
An outcome X is worse for people if the average net harm per
person to the X-people by the occurrence of X would be greater than the average net harm per person to the Y-people by
the occurrence of Y.
On both these views, B is worse than A. That is to say, both views
would say that the harm to the -people would be justified by
the harm-reducing effect that the presence of these people has on
(many of ) the -people.
Of the two views, the average view is the less plausible one. Adding extra lives does not increase the average harm per person if the
quality of life of the new people is the same or better than those
who preceded them. Thus twelve billion poor quality lives is no
⁴⁵ Parfit, Derek, Reasons and Persons. (emphasis added).
⁴⁶ Ibid. (emphasis added).

 ∼ Population and Extinction

worse, on the average view, than six billion lives of the same quality. But it surely must be worse to inflict that same harm on double
the number of people. The total view can avoid this problem. The
total harm in a world with twelve billion poor quality lives is greater than that in a world with six billion lives of the same quality.
Thus the negative wide total person-affecting view provides one
answer about when extra lives may be created in order to reduce
the harm to already existent people. We may do so when we
thereby minimize the total harm that people suffer.
Some may find this answer unsatisfactory on the grounds that
it is concerned only with how much harm there is and not at all
with how that harm is distributed and how it is brought about. For
example, some may think that it makes a difference whether a larger number of people are each suffering lesser harm or whether
a smaller number of people are each suffering greater harm. On
this view, it may be worse to create fewer people who suffer more
than it would be to create more people who suffer less, even if the
total amounts of harm are equivalent. Others may think that it is
at least somewhat worse to bring about harm by causing people to
exist than it is to allow harm to result from failing to bring people
into existence. This may be because they think that actively bringing about harm is worse than passively doing so. More plausibly it
may be because they think that creating new people, and thereby
harming them, in order to make our own lives less bad, is to treat
those new people as mere means to our ends. On this view, there
may be a presumption against creating people in order to make
our lives go less well. Although that presumption may be defeated
where the reduction in harm is sufficiently great, the harm of creating people cannot be justified by merely an equivalent reduction
in the harm to already existing people.
Some people may be surprised that a person-affecting view
can be subjected to criticisms—about distribution of harm, for
example—that are typically levelled at (impersonal) utilitarian
views. However, both the wide total person-affecting view and the
Population and Extinction ∼ 

wide average person-affecting view may, in fact, not be personaffecting at all. Derek Parfit recognizes this when he says that each
of the two wide person-affecting views ‘restates the impersonal
principle in person-affecting form’⁴⁷ or ‘person-affecting terms’.⁴⁸ It
is far from clear whether the principles are person-affecting at all if
they are actually impersonal principles in disguise. An impersonal
view does not become a person-affecting one simply because it is
stated in a way that sounds person-affecting. Impersonal principles
are not concerned with the impact an action has on particular
people but are rather concerned with the impact an action has on
people in general. It is unsurprising, therefore, that such views will
not be able to account adequately for concerns about the harm
done to particular people by being brought into existence.
This is not to say that every possible wide person-affecting
principle must succumb to this problem. Perhaps there is a version
of this principle that is genuinely person-affecting. In other words,
perhaps there is a way of filling out ‘less good for the X-people
than . . .for the Y-people’ in a way that takes account of the impact
on particular individual people. Averaging and totalling are not the
only ways.
Whether or not this is the case, there are some views that can
take account of the concerns about how harms are distributed and
brought about. For example, a rights or deontological view may
say that some harms are so bad that they may not be inflicted even
if failing to inflict them causes greater harm to others. On such
a view, for example, it would be wrong to remove somebody’s
healthy kidney involuntarily even though the harm to a potential
recipient of not doing the transplant would be greater than the
harm to the involuntary donor of doing it. This is because either
the donor has a right not to have his kidney involuntarily removed,
or others have a duty not to remove it involuntarily. If there is a
⁴⁷ Parfit, Derek, Reasons and Persons. .
⁴⁸ Ibid. .

 ∼ Population and Extinction

right not to be brought into existence—a right that has a bearer
only when it is breached—then it might be argued that it would
be wrong to create new people even if this reduced the harm to
currently existing people. Those who are worried about attributing,
to non-existent beings, a right not to be brought into existence, may
think of this matter instead in terms of duties not to bring people
into existence. These would be duties not to inflict the harm that
is inflicted by bringing people into existence. On this deontological
view, there is a duty not to bring new people into existence—a
duty that may not be violated even if doing so would be less than
the harm suffered by existent people in the absence of new people.
The idea here is that it would be wrong to create people, even if
there are fewer of them, to suffer the final-people fate, in order to
spare ourselves (even if there are more of us) that same fate.
Where the rights or duties are absolute, it will not matter how
much greater the harm to already existent people is. Where the
rights are non-absolute, the harms they protect against may not
be inflicted merely for an equivalent harm reduction for others
but may be inflicted for a significantly greater harm reduction for
others. The stronger the non-absolute right, the greater the harm
reduction to others must be.
If we combine my anti-natalist arguments with a rights view in
order to answer questions about when, if ever, we may cause new
people to exist in order to reduce harm to existing people, our answers will not only depend on what view we take of the strength of
rights. They will also depend on what view we take about the magnitude of the harm of coming into existence. The greater the harm,
the more likely it is to be protected against by a stronger right.
I have examined a range of views and their implications for the
following questions:
. May we ever create new lives in order to improve the quality
of existent lives?
. If so, under what conditions may we do so?
Population and Extinction ∼ 

These views and their implications can be summarized as shown in
Figure ..
1. (Narrow) Person-Affecting View49
2. Negative Average View50

Cannot answer the question.
Incompatible with the anti-natalist
argument

3. Negative Total View51

We may create new people where the
total amount of harm in doing so is
equivalent to, or less than, the harm that
would be suffered by existing people if
the new people were not created.
4a. More stringent

4. Rights/Deontological View

rights or duty
view: Creating new
people can never
be justified by any
reduction in total
Creating new

harm, no matter

people cannot be

how great that

justified by mere

reduction may be.

reduction in total

4b. Less stringent
rights or duty view:

harm.

Creating new
people may be
justified by
substantial (but not
mere) reduction in
total harm.

Figure 6.3.
⁴⁹ I put ’Narrow’ in parenthesis, because I have now made it clear that the narrow
person-affecting view may be the only truly person-affecting view, although I have
indicated that it may still be possible to formulate a wide person-affecting view that
is also truly person-affecting.
⁵⁰ I refer to this simply as the Negative Average View rather than the Negative
Wide Average Person-Affecting view, because we have now seen that the ‘personaffecting’ label is misleading, and if that is so then the adjective ‘wide’ is also
unnecessary.
⁵¹ I refer to this simply as the Negative Total View rather than the Negative Wide
Total Person-Affecting view, because we have now seen that the ‘person-affecting’
label is misleading, and if that is so then the adjective ‘wide’ is also unnecessary.

 ∼ Population and Extinction

Only the negative total view and the rights or deontological
view are plausible candidates for answering anti-natalist questions
about when procreation may be permitted in order to prevent
further harm to existent people. Although both the negative
total view and the less stringent rights or deontological view do
permit some creation of new people, they are both compatible
with anti-natalism. This is because they only permit the creation
of new people as an interim measure as a way of phasing out
humanity with the least moral costs. The more stringent rights or
deontological view is clearly compatible with anti-natalism.
It is not clear whether the conditions of either the negative total
view or the less stringent rights or duty view are met in our world.
In other words, it is not obvious that creating new people would
reduce total harm at all (to meet the total view’s condition) or
whether it would reduce it enough (to satisfy the condition of the
less stringent rights or duty view). Although phased extinction may
very likely reduce the number of people suffering the final-people
fate, it may either increase the total harm (because more people are
harmed) or not reduce the total harm enough to warrant harming
those who are brought into existence. In addition to the obvious
normative questions there are also important empirical ones.
Whether or not the conditions of the total view or the less
stringent rights or duty view are met, ordinary procreators or
potential procreators cannot currently appeal to them to justify
their reproducing. This is because the population-related quality of
life problems currently faced are those resulting from increasing
not decreasing population. And even if the population growth
started to taper off or transform into gradual population decline,
that would still not be enough. It is only in situations of very rapid
population reduction or of reduction back to levels that humans
exceeded millennia ago, that questions about creating people to
reduce harm could even arise. We are nowhere near there.

Population and Extinction ∼ 

EXTINCTION
My arguments in this chapter and previous ones imply that it
would be better if humans (and other species) became extinct. All
things being equal, my arguments also suggest that it would be
better if this occurred sooner rather than later. These conclusions
are deeply unsettling to many people. I shall now assess that
common response in order to determine whether the prospect of
human extinction really is to be regretted, and whether it really
would be better for it to occur sooner rather than later.
The human species, like every other species, will eventually
become extinct.⁵² Many people are disturbed by this prospect
and take comfort only in the hope that it may still be a very
long time until this occurs.⁵³ Others are not so sure that our
species has a long future. In every generation there are the few
who believe that ‘the end is nigh’. Often these views are the
product of uninformed, often religiously inspired, eschatology,
if not of mental disorder. Sometimes, however, they are not.⁵⁴
There are those who believe that not only external threats, such
as asteroid impact, but also current human practices, including
non-sustainable consumption, environmental damage, new and
recrudescent diseases, and nuclear or biological weapons, pose a
serious threat to the long-term future of humanity. For others,
the argument for more imminent extinction is not empirical but

⁵² As James Lenman says, the ‘Second Law of Thermodynamics will get us in
the end in the fantastically unlikely event that nothing else does first’. See his ‘On
Becoming Extinct’, Pacific Philosophical Quarterly,  () .
⁵³ There is the joke about the old lady who attended a lecture on the future of the
universe. Afterwards she asked the speaker a question: ‘Excuse me, Professor, but
when did you say that the universe would come to an end?’ ‘In about four billion
years’, replied the speaker. ‘Thank God,’ remarked the old lady, ‘I thought that you
said four million.’
⁵⁴ Rees, Martin, Our Final Hour: A Scientist’s Warning (New York: Basic Books,
).

 ∼ Population and Extinction

philosophical. Reasoning probabilistically, they argue that we are
destined to ‘doom soon’.⁵⁵
I shall not assess arguments and evidence for competing views
about when human extinction will occur. We know it will occur,
and this fact has a curious effect on my argument. In a strange way
it makes my argument an optimistic one. Although things are now
not the way they should be—there are people when there should
be none—things will someday be the way they should be—there
will be no people. In other words, although things are now bad,
they will be better, even if they first get worse with the creation of
new people. Some may wish to be spared this kind of optimism, but
some optimists may take a measure of comfort in this observation.

Two means of extinction
It would be helpful to distinguish between two ways in which a
species can become extinct. The first is for it to be killed off. The
second is for it to die off. We might call the first ‘killing-extinction’
and the second either ‘dying-extinction’ or ‘non-generative extinction’. When a species is killed off, extinction is brought about by
killing members of the species until there are no more of them.
This killing may be by humans or it may be by the hand of nature
(or by humans forcing the hand of nature). By contrast, when a
species dies off, extinction is brought about by a failure to replace
those members of the species whose lives come to an inevitable
natural end.
It should be clear that the two means of extinction can overlap.
What often happens is that so many members of a species are killed
off, that the remaining ones cannot effectively replace themselves
and those who were killed, and thus when they then die out
the species becomes extinct. Alternatively, when a species fails to
⁵⁵ Leslie, John, The End of the World: The Science and Ethics of Human Extinction
(London: Routledge, ).

Population and Extinction ∼ 

reproduce adequately, the species is brought to extinction by the
killing of the few remaining members of the species.
Notwithstanding this overlap, the distinction between the
two kinds of extinction (or, if you prefer, the two features of
extinction) is helpful. There are clear differences between the two.
Most obviously, killing-extinction cuts lives short, whereas dyingextinction does not. Although it may be bad for anyone of us to die,
it is still worse to die earlier than we need to. Secondly, there is a
moral difference between some cases of killing-extinction and cases
of dying-extinction. Were anti-natalists to become pro-mortalists
and embark on a ‘speciecide’ programme of killing humans, their
actions would be plagued by moral problems that would not be
faced by dying-extinction. Humans killing their own species to
extinction is troubling for all the reasons that killing is troubling.
It is (usually) bad for those who are killed, and unlike dying (from
natural causes), it is a bad that could be avoided (until dying
occurs). Although we can regret somebody’s death from natural
causes at the end of a full life span, we cannot say that any wrong
has been done, whereas we can say that a moral agent killing
somebody, without proper justification, is wrong.
In pointing to both these differences, I assume that death is bad
for the one who dies. The view that death is a harm to the one
who dies is not an unreasonable view. Indeed it is the common
sense view and underlies many important judgements we make. It
has been challenged nonetheless. I shall consider this philosophical challenge in the concluding chapter, not in order to defend or
reject it, but to show its relevance.

Three concerns about extinction
There are three ways in which extinction might be thought to be
bad:
. Where extinction is brought about by killing, it might be
thought to be bad because it cuts lives short.
 ∼ Population and Extinction

. Whichever way extinction is brought about, it might be
thought to be bad for those who precede it.
. The state of extinction might be thought to be bad, in itself.
On this view, a world in which there are no people (or other
conscious beings) is regrettable in its own right, irrespective
of the significance of this state of affairs for earlier beings.⁵⁶
We can make most sense of the first and second bases for regret.
Unless people’s lives are not worth continuing, cutting their lives
short makes their lives still worse—one adds an early death to all
the other harms of coming into existence. But extinction need not
be brought about this way. Indeed, desisting from creating further
people is the best way of ensuring that future people’s lives are not
cut short. There simply would not be any people whose lives could
be cut short.
But this option does not avoid the second concern about
extinction. The last generation to die out would bear heavy
burdens. First, its hopes and desires for the future beyond itself
would be thwarted. Although such hopes and desires of the
penultimate and previous generations would also be thwarted,
the harm to the final generation would be most severe because
its hopes and desires for the future beyond itself would be
most radically thwarted. There would be no future beyond
itself, whereas there would be at least some future beyond the
penultimate generation and a little more for each of the earlier
generations. The second and more obvious burden for the final
generation is that it would live in a world in which the structures of
⁵⁶ It is noteworthy that human concern about human extinction takes a different
form from human concern (where there is any) about the extinction of non-human
species. Most humans who are concerned about the extinction of non-human species
are not concerned about the individual animals whose lives are cut short in the
passage to extinction, even though that is one of the best reasons to be concerned
about extinction (at least in its killing form). The popular concern about animal
extinction is usually concern for humans—that we shall live in a world impoverished
by the loss of one aspect of faunal diversity, that we shall no longer be able to behold
or use that species of animal. In other words, none of the typical concerns about
human extinction are applied to non-human species extinction.

Population and Extinction ∼ 

society would gradually break down. There would be no younger
working generation growing the crops, preserving order, running
hospitals and homes for the aged, and burying the dead.
The situation is a bleak one indeed and we can certainly say that
looming extinction would be bad for the final people in this way.
It is hard to know whether their suffering would be any greater
than that of so many people within each generation. I am not at all
sure that it would, but let us imagine the opposite for the moment.
In order to determine whether this regrettable feature of impending extinction is bad all things considered, we must take account
not only of the final people’s interests, but also of the harm that is
avoided by not producing new generations.
Whenever humanity comes to an end, there will be serious costs
for the last people. Either they will be killed or they will languish
from the consequences of dwindling population and the collapse
of social infrastructure. All things being equal, nothing is gained if
this happens later. The same suffering occurs. But there is a cost
that does not have to be paid if extinction occurs earlier—the cost
to the intervening new generations, those that exist between the
present generation and final one. The case for earlier extinction is
thus strong.
At best, the production of a limited number of future people, as
the discussion in ‘Phased Extinction’ showed, could be justified as
part of a programme of phased extinction, whereby the number of
people who will suffer the fate of the final generation is radically
reduced from its current billions. However, whether the number
of people could be reduced fast enough without the costs of rapid population decline, to a level where the number of final people
was small enough to offset the harm to intervening generations,
is a difficult one to answer. Whatever the answer, we can say that
extinction within a few generations is to be preferred to extinction
only after innumerably more generations. Earlier extinction may
be worse for some people, but it does not follow that it is worse all
things considered.
 ∼ Population and Extinction

Whether extinction occurs earlier or later, the third concern is
relevant. This is the concern that a world without humans is bad
in itself—it is incomplete or deficient. Widespread though this
concern is, it is very difficult to make sense of it if one accepts,
as most people do, the asymmetry of pain and pleasure. A world
without any humans (or other conscious beings) cannot be bad for
those who would have existed had extinction not occurred. Indeed,
as I have argued, the alternative scenario in which they would
have been brought into existence would have been bad for them.
A world devoid of such beings is, in this way, a better world. There
is no harm in such a world.
Now it might be objected that although a world without
humans is better for those humans who would otherwise have
existed, a world without humans would be worse in other ways.
For example, it would lack moral agents and rational deliberators,
and it would be somewhat less diverse. There are a number of
problems with such arguments. First, what is so special about a
world that contains moral agents and rational deliberators? That
humans value a world that contains beings such as themselves says
more about their inappropriate sense of self-importance than it
does about the world. (Is the world intrinsically better for having
six-legged animals? And if so, why? Would it be better still if there
were also seven-legged animals?) Although humans may value
moral agency and rational deliberation, it is far from clear that
these features of our world have value sub specie aeternitatis. Thus
if there were no more humans there would also be nobody to
regret that state of affairs. Nor is it clear why a less diverse world
is worse if there is nobody deprived of that diversity.⁵⁷ Finally,
even if we think that such factors as moral agency, rationality, and
diversity enhance the world, it is highly implausible that their value
⁵⁷ Although earlier people might regret the prospect of these later states of affairs,
we are now examining the third (and not the second) of the three concerns about
extinction, whereby the state of extinction is bad independently of the interests of
those who precede it.

Population and Extinction ∼ 

outweighs the vast amount of suffering that comes with human
life. It strikes me, therefore, that the concern that humans will
not exist at some future time is either a symptom of the human
arrogance that our presence makes the world a better place or is
some misplaced sentimentalism.
Many people mourn the prospect of human extinction. Were
this extinction both imminent and known to be so, distress about
the end of humanity would become much more acute. That
distress and sadness, however, would be but another feature of the
suffering that foreshadowed the end of human life.

 ∼ Population and Extinction


Conclusion
So I have praised the dead that are already dead more than
the living that are yet alive; but better than both of them is
he who has not yet been, who has not seen the evil work
that is done under the sun.
Ecclesiastes :–
There was a young man of Cape Horn
Who wished that he had never been born;
And he wouldn’t have been
If his father had seen
That the tip of the rubber was torn.
Unknown¹

¹ I am grateful to Tony Holiday for first drawing this limerick to my attention.
Arthur Deex, expert on limericks, kindly gave me some of the history of this one.
The version here is evidently a naughty spoof, by an unknown author, of Edward
Lear’s original:
There was an Old Man of Cape Horn,
Who wished he had never been born;
So he sat on a chair
Till he died of despair
That dolorous Man of Cape Horn.
(Jackson, Holbrook, (ed.) The Complete Nonsense of Edward Lear (London: Faber &
Faber, ) .) For other variants see Legman, G. The Limerick:  Examples with
Notes, Variants and Index (New York: Bell Publishing Company, ) , .

COUNTERING
THE COUNTER-INTUITIVENESS
OBJECTION
The view that coming into existence is always a harm runs counter
to most people’s intuitions. They think that this view simply cannot
be right. Its implications, discussed in Chapters  to , do not fare
any better in the court of common intuitions. The idea that people
should not have babies, that there is a presumption in favour of
abortion (at least in the earlier stages of gestation), and that it
would be best if there were no more conscious life on the planet is
likely to be dismissed as ridiculous. Indeed, some people are likely
to find these views deeply offensive.
A number of philosophers have rejected other views because
they imply that it would be better not to bring new people
into existence. We already saw, in the previous chapter, that
a number of thinkers reject the maximin principle because it
implies that there should be no more people. There are other
examples, however. Peter Singer rejects a ‘moral ledger’ view of
utilitarianism, whereby the creation of an unsatisfied preference
is a kind of ‘debit’ that is cancelled only when that preference is
satisfied. He says that his view must be rejected because it entails
that it would be wrong ‘to bring into existence a child who will on
the whole be very happy, and will be able to satisfy nearly all her
preferences, but will still have some preferences unsatisfied’.² Nils
Holtug rejects frustrationism³ —the view that while the frustration
of preferences has negative value, the satisfaction of preferences
simply avoids negative value and contributes nothing positive.
Frustrationism implies that we harm people by bringing them into
existence if they will have frustrated desires (which everybody
² Singer, Peter, Practical Ethics, nd edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
) .
³ This view, also known as anti-frustrationism, was discussed in the penultimate
section (‘Other asymmetries’) of Chapter .

 ∼ Conclusion

has). Thus he dismisses frustrationism as ‘implausible, indeed
deeply counter-intuitive’.⁴ Of the implication that it is ‘wrong to
have a child whose life is much better than the life of anyone we
know’, he says: ‘Surely, this cannot be right.’⁵
I now turn to the question whether it matters that my conclusions are so counter-intuitive. Are my arguments instances of reason gone mad? Should my conclusions be dismissed on account of
being so eccentric? Although I understand what motivates these
questions, my answer to each of them is an emphatic ‘no’.
At the outset, it is noteworthy that a view’s counter-intuitiveness
cannot by itself constitute a decisive consideration against it. This
is because intuitions are often profoundly unreliable—a product of
mere prejudice. Views that are taken to be deeply counter-intuitive
in one place and time are often taken to be obviously true in another. The view that slavery is wrong, or the view that there is nothing wrong with ‘miscegenation’, were once thought to be highly
implausible and counter-intuitive. They are now taken, at least in
many parts of the world, to be self-evident. It is not enough, therefore, to find a view or its implications counter-intuitive, or even
offensive. One has to examine the arguments for the disliked conclusion. Most of those who have rejected the view that it is wrong
to create more people have done so without assessing the argument for that conclusion. They have simply assumed that this view
must be false.
One reason against making this assumption is that the conclusion follows from views that are not only accepted by most people
but are also quite reasonable. As I explained in Chapter , the
asymmetry of pleasure and pain constitutes the best explanation
of a number of important moral judgements about creating new
people. All my argument does is uncover that asymmetry and to
show where it leads.
⁴ Holtug, Nils, ‘On the value of coming into existence’, The Journal of Ethics, 
() .
⁵ Ibid.

Conclusion ∼ 

It might be suggested, however, that my argument should be
understood as a reductio ad absurdum of the commitment to asymmetry. In other words, it might be said that accepting my conclusion is more counter-intuitive than rejecting asymmetry. Thus, if
one is faced with the choice between accepting my conclusion and
rejecting asymmetry, the latter is preferable.
There are a number of problems with this line of argument.
First, we should remember just what it is to which we are
committed if we reject asymmetry. Of course, there are various
ways of rejecting asymmetry, but the least implausible way would
be by denying that absent pleasures are ‘not bad’ and claiming
instead that they are ‘bad’. This would commit us to saying that
we do have a (strong?) moral reason and thus a presumptive duty,
based on the interests of future possible happy people, to create
those people. It would also commit us to saying that we can create
a child for that child’s sake and that we should regret, for the sake
of those happy people whom we could have created but did not
create, that we did not create them. Finally, it would commit us
not only to regretting that parts of the earth and all the rest of the
universe are uninhabited, but also to regretting this out of concern
for those who could otherwise have come into existence in these
places.
Matters become still worse if we attempt to abandon asymmetry
in another way—by claming that absent pains in Scenario B are
merely ‘not bad’. That would commit us to saying that we have
no moral reason, grounded in the interests of a possible future suffering person, to avoid creating that person. We could no longer
regret, based on the interests of a suffering child, that we created
that child. Nor could we regret, for the sake of miserable people
suffering in some part of the world, that they were ever created.
Those who treat my argument as a reductio of asymmetry may
find it easier to say that they are prepared to abandon asymmetry
than actually to embrace the implications of doing so. It certainly
will not suffice to say that it is better to give up asymmetry and
 ∼ Conclusion

then to proceed, in their ethical theorizing and in their practice, as
though asymmetry still held. At the very least, then, my argument
should force them to wrestle with the full implications of rejecting
asymmetry, which extend well beyond those that I have outlined.
I doubt very much that many of those who say that they would
rather give up asymmetry really would abandon it.
A second problem with treating my argument as a reductio
of asymmetry is that although my conclusions may be counterintuitive, the dominant intuitions in this matter seem thoroughly
untrustworthy. This is so for two reasons.
First, why should we think that it is acceptable to cause great
harm to somebody—which the arguments in Chapter  show we
do whenever we create a child—when we could avoid doing so
without depriving that person of anything? In other words, how
reliable can an intuition be if, even absent the interests of others,
it allows the infliction of great harm that could have been avoided
without any cost to the person who is harmed? Such an intuition
would not be worthy of respect in any other context. Why should
it be thought to have such force only in procreative contexts?
Secondly, we have excellent reason for thinking that pro-natal
intuitions are the product of (at least non-rational, but possibly
irrational) psychological forces. As I showed in Chapter , there
are pervasive and powerful features of human psychology that
lead people to think that their lives are better than they really are.
Thus their judgements are unreliable. Moreover, there is a good
evolutionary explanation for the deep-seated belief that people
do not harm their children seriously by bringing them into existence. Those who do not have this belief are less likely to reproduce. Those with reproduction-enhancing beliefs are more likely
to breed and pass on whatever attributes incline one to such beliefs.
What is important to both of these reasons is that it is not merely
my extreme claim—that coming into existence is a harm even
when a life contains only an iota of suffering—that is counterintuitive. My more moderate claim—that there is sufficient bad in
Conclusion ∼ 

all actual lives to make coming into existence a harm, even if lives
with only an iota of bad would not be harmful—is also counterintuitive. If only the extreme claim ran counter to common
intuitions, then these intuitions would be (somewhat) less suspect.
However, then it would have to be said that my extreme claim
would be more palatable if all actual lives were largely devoid of
bad. This is because the claim would be primarily of theoretical
interest and would have little application for procreation, given
that the interests of existent people could more plausibly be
thought to outweigh the harm to new people. But it is not merely
my extreme claim that runs counter to most people’s intuitions.
Most people think it is implausible that it is harmful and wrong
to start lives filled with as much bad as all actual lives contain.
Worse still, those who would treat my argument as a reductio of
asymmetry should note that their argument could also be used by
a species doomed to lives much worse than our own. Although
we might see their lives as great harms, if they were subject to the
kinds of optimistic psychological forces characteristic of humans
they too would argue that it is counter-intuitive to claim that they
were harmed by being brought into existence. That which would
not be counter-intuitive from our perspective would be counterintuitive from theirs. Yet we can see, with the benefit of some
distance from their lives, that little store should be placed on their
intuitions about this matter. Something similar can be said about
the common human intuition that creating (most) humans is not
a harm.⁶
⁶ As it happens, not all humans share the common intuition that procreation is
morally acceptable. There are a non-negligible number of reasonable people who
accept an anti-natal view. Not infrequently we hear of people who say that ours
is not the sort of world into which children should be brought. The underlying
idea is that we live in a world of suffering—a claim I defended in the final section
of Chapter —and it would be best to avoid creating any new victims of such
suffering. I am ready to admit that there are relatively few people who think this,
and fewer still who have the strength to act on it, but they are not a lunatic fringe.
Moreover, others can understand and make sense of their views and motivations,

 ∼ Conclusion

There are good reasons, then, for not treating my conclusion as
a reductio of asymmetry. In short, when one has a powerful argument, based on highly plausible premisses, for a conclusion that if
acted upon would reduce suffering without depriving the suffering
person of anything, but which is rejected merely because of primal
psychological features that compromise our judgement, then the
counter-intuitiveness of the conclusion should not count against it.
No doubt there will be some people who are unconvinced by this.
If the reason for this is that they take the (alleged) absurdity of my
conclusion as axiomatic, then there is nothing that I could say that
would convince them. Whatever argument I mustered for my conclusion they would consider refuted by the conclusion it generated.
This, however, would not demonstrate a defect in my argument.
It would demonstrate only that the negation of my conclusion had
attained the status of dogma. There is nothing one can say to convince the dogmatic.
There are some people, and I am among them, who think that
there is nothing implausible either in the view that coming into
existence is always a harm or in the view that we ought not to have
children.⁷ It is highly unlikely that a large proportion of humanity
even if they do not agree or follow suit. I agree that the suffering that potential
people are likely to endure is sufficient for it to be preferable that they not come
into existence. My argument in Chapter  extends this widely intelligible intuition
and shows that even much less suffering—indeed any suffering at all—would be
sufficient to make coming into existence a harm. I emphasize again that although
my argument suggests that so long as there is anything bad in a life it is better not to
start it, if the amount of bad in a life were truly miniscule then it need not be wrong
to have children. This is because the harm could more plausibly be outweighed by
the benefits to others. However, as I argued in Chapter , the harm in every life is far
from miniscule. People’s lives, even the most blessed ones, go much worse than is
usually thought. Moreover, there is little reason for anybody to think that a potential
child will be among the most blessed. There are simply too many things that can
go wrong.
⁷ Among philosophers, these include not only Christoph Fehige and Seana
Shiffrin, both of whom were discussed in the penultimate section of Chapter , but
also Hermann Vetter, ‘Utilitarianism and New Generations’, Mind, / ()
–.

Conclusion ∼ 

will come to share this view. That is deeply regrettable—because
of the immense amount of suffering that this will cause between
now and the ultimate demise of humanity.

R E S P O N D I N G TO T H E O P T I M I S T
By most accounts, the views I have defended in this book are rather
pessimistic. Pessimism, like optimism, can mean different things,
of course.⁸ One kind of pessimism or optimism is about the facts.
Here pessimists and optimists disagree about what is or will be the
case. Thus, they might disagree about whether there is more pleasure or pain in the world at any given time or about whether some
person will or will not recover from cancer. A second kind of pessimism and optimism is not about the facts, but about an evaluation
of the facts. Here pessimists and optimists disagree not about what
is or will be the case, but instead about whether what is or will
be the case is good or bad. An optimist of this kind might agree
with the pessimist, for example, that there is more pain than pleasure, but think that the pain is worth the pleasure. Alternatively, the
pessimist might agree with the optimist that there is more pleasure
than pain, but deny that even that quantity of pleasure is worth the
pain. The ‘is or will be’ clause in both the factual and evaluative
versions refers to a third distinction, but one that obviously cuts
across the first two. Very often pessimism and optimism are understood to be future-oriented—to refer to assessments of how things
will be. However, both terms are also sometimes used in either a
non-future-oriented or alternatively a timeless sense.
The view that coming into existence is always a serious harm is
pessimistic in both a factual and evaluative sense. I have suggested,
factually, that human life contains much more pain (and other
⁸ Much of the rest of this paragraph is drawn from my Introduction to David
Benatar (ed.), Life, Death and Meaning (Lanham MD: Rowman & Littlefield, ) .

 ∼ Conclusion

negative things) than people realize. Evaluatively, I have endorsed
the asymmetry of pleasure and pain and suggested that whereas
life’s pleasures do not make life worth starting, life’s pains do
make life not worth starting. In future-oriented terms, my view is
pessimistic in most ways but could be construed as optimistic in
one way. Given how much suffering occurs every minute, there is
very good reason to think that there will be much more suffering
before sentient life comes to an end, although I cannot predict
with any certainty just how much more suffering there will be.
All things being equal, the longer sentient life continues, the more
suffering there will be. However, there is an optimistic spin on my
view, as I noted in Chapter . Humanity and other sentient life will
eventually come to an end. For those who judge the demise of
humanity to be a bad thing, the prediction that this is what will
occur is a pessimistic one. By contrast, combining my evaluation
that it would be better if there where no more people with the
prediction that there will come a time when there will be no more
people yields an optimistic assessment. Things are bad now, but
they will not always be bad. On the other hand, again, if one thinks
that the better state of affairs will be a long time in coming, then
one could characterize the view that it is far off as pessimistic.
Pessimism tends not to be well received. On account of the psychological dispositions to think that things are better than they are,
which I discussed in Chapter , people want to hear positive messages. They want to hear that things are better than they think, not
worse. Indeed, where there is not a pathologizing of pessimism by
placing it under the rubric of ‘depression’, there is often an impatience with or condemnation of it. Some people will have these
reactions to the view that coming into existence is always a harm.
These optimists will dismiss this view as weak and self-indulgent.
They may tell us that we cannot ‘cry over spilled milk’. We have
already come into existence and there is no use bemoaning that fact
in lugubrious self-pitying. We must ‘count our blessings’, ‘make the
most of life’, ‘take pleasure’, and ‘look on the bright side’.
Conclusion ∼ 

There are good reasons not to be intimidated by the optimist’s
chidings. First, optimism cannot be the right view merely because
it is cheery, just as pessimism cannot be the right view merely because it is grim. Which view we adopt must depend on the evidence. I have argued in this book that a grim view about coming
into existence is the right one.
Secondly, one can regret one’s existence without being selfpitying. This is not to say that there is anything wrong with a
modicum of self-pity. If one pities others, why should one not
pity oneself, at least in moderation? In any event, the view I have
defended is not only self-regarding but also other-regarding in its
relevance. It provides a basis not only for regretting one’s own
existence but also for not having children. In other words, it has
relevance for milk that has not yet been spilled and need not ever
be spilled.
Thirdly, there is nothing in my view that suggests we should
not ‘count our blessings’ if by this one means that one should be
pleased that one’s life is not still worse than it is. A few of us are
very lucky relative to much of the species. There is no harm—and
there may be benefits—in recognizing this. But the injunction
to count one’s blessings is much less compelling when it entails
deceiving oneself into thinking that one was actually lucky to have
come into existence. It is like being grateful that one is in a firstclass cabin on the Titanic as one awaits descent to one’s watery
grave. It may be better to die in first-class than in steerage, but not
so much better as to count oneself very lucky. Nor does my view
preclude our making the most of life or taking pleasure whenever
we can (within the constraints of morality). I have argued that our
lives are very bad. There is no reason why we should not try to
make them less so, on condition that we do not spread the suffering
(including the harm of existence).
Finally, the optimist’s impatience with or condemnation of pessimism often has a smug macho tone to it (although males have
no monopoly of it). There is a scorn for the perceived weakness
 ∼ Conclusion

of the pessimist who should instead ‘grin and bear it’. This view is
defective for the same reason that macho views about other kinds
of suffering are defective. It is an indifference to or inappropriate
denial of suffering, whether one’s own or that of others. The injunction to ‘look on the bright side’ should be greeted with a large
dose of both scepticism and cynicism. To insist that the bright side
is always the right side is to put ideology before the evidence. Every
cloud, to change metaphors, may have a silver lining, but it may
very often be the cloud rather than the lining on which one should
focus if one is to avoid being drenched by self-deception. Cheery
optimists have a much less realistic view of themselves than do
those who are depressed.⁹
Optimists might respond that even if I am right that coming into
existence is always a harm it is better not to dwell on this fact, for
to dwell on it only compounds the harm by making one miserable.
There is an element of truth here. However, we need to put it in
perspective. An acute sense of regret about one’s own existence is
probably the most effective way to avoid inflicting that same harm
on others. If people are able to recognize the harm of having come
into existence but still remain cheery without slipping into the practice of making new people, their cheer should not be begrudged.
However, if their cheer comes at the cost of self-deception and resultant procreation, then they are susceptible to a charge of having
lost perspective. They may be happier than others, but that does
not make them right.

D E AT H A N D S U I C I D E
Many people believe that it is an implication of the view that coming into existence is always a harm that it would be preferable to
⁹ For a discussion of this see Taylor, Shelley E., and Brown, Jonathon D., ‘Illusion
and Well-Being: A Social Psychological Perspective on Mental Health’, Psychological
Bulletin, / () –.

Conclusion ∼ 

die than to continue living. Some people go so far as to say that the
view that coming into existence is a harm implies the desirability
not simply of death but of suicide.
There is nothing incoherent about the view that coming into
existence is a harm and that if one does come into existence ceasing
to exist is better than continuing to exist. This is the view expressed
in the following quotation from Sophocles:
Never to have been born is best
But if we must see the light, the next best
Is quickly returning whence we came.
When youth departs, with all its follies,
Who does not stagger under evils? Who escapes them?¹⁰

And it is implicit in, or at least compatible with, Montesquieu’s
claim that ‘Men should be bewailed at their birth and not at their
death’.¹¹
Nevertheless, the view that coming into existence is always a
harm does not imply that death is better than continuing to exist,
and a fortiori that suicide is (always) desirable.¹² Life may be
sufficiently bad that it is better not to come into existence, but
not so bad that it is better to cease existing. It will be recalled,
from Chapter , that it is possible to have different evaluations
of future-life and present-life cases. I explained in that chapter
¹⁰ Sophocles, Oedipus at Colonus, lines –.
¹¹ Montesquieu, ‘Letter Forty’, Persian Letters, trans. John Davidson,  (London:
Gibbings & Company, ) .
¹² Commenting on the apparent oddity of regretting one’s existence yet clinging
to life, Woody Allen speaks of two Jews eating in a restaurant in the Catskills. The
one says to the other: ‘The food here is terrible.’ The other replies: ‘Yes, and the
portions are so small.’ At one level, there is nothing strange about disliking some
food and complaining that there is not more of it. Not having enough food—going
hungry—is bad even if the alternative is to satiate oneself with food that does not
taste very nice. The reason why the Woody Allen image is odd and funny is that
we assume that the pair are not in need of the extra food—either that their eating
is more recreational or that the portions are big enough. The same dialogue between
two Jews in Auschwitz would not be funny at all, because it wouldn’t be odd at all
to complain both about the quality and quantity of the food.

 ∼ Conclusion

that there is good reason for setting the quality threshold for
a life worth starting higher than the quality threshold for a life
worth continuing. This is because the existent can have interests
in continuing to exist, and thus harms that make life not worth
continuing must be sufficiently severe to defeat those interests.
By contrast, the non-existent have no interest in coming into
existence. Therefore, the avoidance of even lesser harms—or, on
my view, any harm—will be decisive.
Thus, it is because we (usually) have an interest in continuing
to exist that death may be thought of as a harm, even though
coming into existence is also a harm. Indeed, the harm of death
may partially explain why coming into existence is a harm. Coming into existence is bad in part because it invariably leads to the
harm of ceasing to exist. That may be behind George Santayana’s
claim that the ‘fact of having been born is a very bad augury for
immortality’.¹³ That we are born destined to die is, on this view,
a great harm.
The view that one has an interest in continuing to live (so long as
the quality of one’s life has not fallen beneath the lower threshold
of a life worth continuing) is a common one. However, it has been
subjected to ancient and resilient objections. Epicurus famously argued that death is not bad for the one who dies because so long as
one exists, one is not dead, and once death arrives one no longer
exists. Thus, my being dead (in contrast to my dying) is not something that I can experience. Nor is it a condition in which I can be.
Instead it is a condition in which I am not. Accordingly my death
is not something that can be bad for me. Lucretius, a disciple of
Epicurus’ and thus also an Epicurean, advanced a further argument
against death’s being a harm. He argued that since we do not regret
the period of non-existence before we came into being, we should
not regret the non-existence that follows our lives.
¹³ Santayana, George, Reason in Religion (vol. iii of The Life of Reason) (New York:
Charles Scribner’s Sons, ) .

Conclusion ∼ 

The Epicurean arguments assume that death is the irreversible
cessation of existence. Those who think that there is life after
death reject this assumption. Whether or not death is bad on this
alternative view depends on how good the post-mortem life is.
Although this is a topic about which there is much speculation,
nothing vaguely testable can be said about it. In considering
whether my argument entails that death is preferable to continued
life, I shall join the Epicureans in assuming that death is the
irreversible cessation of existence.
The view that death is not bad for the one who died is at odds
with a number of deeply held views. Among these is the view that
murder harms the victim. It is also incompatible with the view that
a longer life is, all things being equal, better than a shorter one. And
it is in conflict with the view that we ought to respect the wishes of
those who are now dead (quite independently of the effect that not
doing so would have on the still living). This is because if death is
not a harm, then nothing that happens after death can be a harm.
Counter-intuitiveness, by itself, is not enough to show that
a view is mistaken, as I have argued. However, there are
some important differences between the counter-intuitiveness of
the Epicurean arguments and the counter-intuitiveness of my
anti-natalist arguments. First, the Epicurean conclusion is more
radically counter-intuitive than my conclusion. I suspect that more
people think, and feel more strongly, that murder harms the victim
than who think that coming into existence is not a harm. Indeed
there are very many people who believe that coming into existence
is often a harm and there are still more people who believe that it is
never a benefit even if they think that it is not also a harm. Yet there
are very few people who truly believe that murder does not harm
the victim. Even where the victim’s life was of a poor quality, it is
widely thought that killing that person without his consent (where
consent could have been obtained) is to wrong him. Secondly, a
precautionary principle applies asymmetrically to the two views.
If the Epicurean is wrong, then people’s acting on the Epicurean
 ∼ Conclusion

argument (by killing others or themselves) would seriously harm
those who were killed. By contrast, if my view is mistaken, people’s
acting on my view (by having failed to procreate) would not harm
those who were not brought into existence. These differences in
the counter-intuitiveness of the Epicurean and anti-natal views are
not sufficient, however, to dismiss the Epicurean arguments out
of hand. Therefore, I turn now to consider, albeit only briefly,
responses to both Epicurean arguments.
I start with Lucretius’ argument. The best way to respond to
this argument is to deny that there is symmetry between prevital and post-mortem non-existence.¹⁴ Whereas any one of us
could live longer, none of us could have come into existence much
earlier. This argument becomes very powerful when we recognize
the kind of existence that we value. It is not some ‘metaphysical
essence’, but rather a thicker, richer conception of the self,¹⁵
that embodies one’s particular memories, beliefs, commitments,
desires, aspirations, and so on. One’s identity, in this thicker sense,
is constructed from one’s particular history. But even if one’s
metaphysical essence could have come into existence earlier, the
history of that being would have been so different that it would
not be the same person as one is. Yet, things are quite different
at the other end of life. Personal histories—biographies—can be
lengthened by not dying sooner. Once one is, one can continue
to be for longer. But an earlier coming into existence would have
been the coming into existence of a different person—one with
whom one might have very little in common.
The most common response to Epicurus’ argument is to say that
death is bad for the person who dies because it deprives that person of future life and the positive features thereof. The deprivation
account of death’s badness does not entail that death is always bad
¹⁴ The term ‘pre-vital non-existence’ is Frederik Kaufman’s. See his ‘Pre-Vital and
Post-Mortem Non-Existence’, American Philosophical Quarterly, / () –.
¹⁵ The argument I outline here is Frederik Kaufman’s. See his ‘Pre-Vital and
Post-Mortem Non-Existence’.

Conclusion ∼ 

for the one who dies. Indeed, where the further life of which somebody is deprived is of a sufficiently poor quality, death is not bad for
that person. Instead it is good. The Epicurean argument, however,
is that death is never bad for the person who dies. The deprivation
account is a response to this, and claims that death can sometimes
be bad for the person who dies. On the deprivation account, even
though a person no longer exists after his death, it is still true that
his death deprives him, the ‘ante-mortem’¹⁶ person, of the further
life he could have enjoyed.
Defenders of Epicurus take issue with the deprivation account.
One objection is that advocates of the deprivation account cannot
say when the harm of death occurs—that is, they cannot date the
time of the harm. The time of the harm cannot be when death occurs because by that time the person who non-Epicureans say is
harmed by the death no longer exists. And if it is the ante-mortem
person who is harmed, one cannot say that the time at which that
person is harmed is the time of his death, because that would involve backward causation—a later event causing an earlier harm.
One response to this challenge is to say that the time at which death
harms is ‘always’ or ‘eternally’.¹⁷ George Pitcher offers a helpful
analogy. He says that if ‘the world should be blasted to smithereens
during the next presidency. . .this would make it true (be responsible for the fact) that even now, during. . .[the current president’s]
term, he is the penultimate president of the United States’.¹⁸ Similarly, one’s later death makes it true that even now one is doomed
not to live longer than one will. Just as there is no backward causation in the case of the penultimate president, so there is no backward causation in a death that harms one all along.
¹⁶ The term ‘ante-mortem’ person is George Pitcher’s. See his ‘The Misfortunes
of the Dead’, American Philosophical Quarterly, / () –.
¹⁷ The term ‘eternally’ is Fred Feldman’s, See his ‘Some Puzzles About the Evil
of Death’, Philosophical Review, / () –.
¹⁸ Pitcher, George, ‘The Misfortunes of the Dead’, .

 ∼ Conclusion

There is a more fundamental (but not clearly more powerful)
objection to the deprivation account. Defenders of Epicurus simply
deny that those who have ceased to exist can be deprived of
anything. David Suits, for example, argues that although the antemortem person may indeed be worse off than he would otherwise
have been had he lived longer, being worse off in this ‘purely
relational’ way is not thought to be sufficient to show that he is
harmed.¹⁹ He argues further that even if it were, there cannot be
real deprivation if there is nobody left to be deprived. One can only
be deprived if one exists.
But here we seem to have an impasse. Defenders of the deprivation account seem to think that death is different and that it is the
one kind of case in which somebody can be deprived without existing. Epicureans, by contrast, insist that death cannot be different
and we must treat deprivation in the same way here as we do in
all other cases. In no other cases can a person be deprived without
existing, so a person cannot be deprived by death, given that death
brings the end of his existence.
Perhaps there is a way to get past this impasse, but I shall not
seek it now. I have shown that the view that coming into existence
is a harm does not entail the view that ceasing to exist is better than
continuing to exist. One can maintain that both are harms. Epicureans deny that ceasing to exist can be a harm. They may also be
committed to saying that death can never be good for the one who
dies, no matter how bad that person’s life has become. Following
the Epicurean reasoning, death can never benefit a person because
so long as he is, death is not, and when death arrives he no longer
is. Death cannot spare anybody from anything any more than it can
deprive anybody of anything.

¹⁹ Suits, David B., ‘Why death is not bad for the one who died’, American
Philosophical Quarterly, / () –.

Conclusion ∼ 

Those who reject the Epicurean view can hold one of a number
of positions:
a) Death is always a harm.
b) Death is always a benefit.
c) Death is sometimes a harm and sometimes a benefit.
The first option is implausible. Life can be so bad that it is better to
die. Those who deny that coming into existence is always a harm,
obviously reject the second option. On this view, coming into existence is not bad and may even be good, and continuing to exist is
good so long as the quality of one’s life is of a sufficiently high standard. Thus death cannot always be a benefit. I said earlier that those
who adopt the view that coming into existence is always a harm
can also reject the second option. They can argue that whereas we
have no interest in coming into existence, once we do exist, we
have an interest in continuing to exist. On the assumption that this
interest is not always defeated by the poor quality of life, death is
not always a benefit. But is this assumption reasonable, given how
serious a harm I have said it is to come into existence? I think that
it is, but saying that it is a reasonable assumption is not to make
a very strong claim. It is to say only that the quality of life is not
always so poor that ceasing to exist is a benefit. It leaves wide open
the question of how often it is not so poor.
This is not a question I need to answer. By a principle of autonomy we parcel out the authority to make decisions about the quality
of individual lives to those whose lives they are. Unlike autonomous
decisions to procreate, autonomous decisions to continue living or
to die are made by those whose lives are in question. It is true that
if people’s lives are worse than they think (as I argued in Chapter )
their assessments about whether their lives are worth continuing
may be mistaken. Nevertheless, that is the sort of mistake we should
allow people to make. It is a mistake, the consequences of which
they must bear—unlike the mistake of thinking that the lives of
one’s potential offspring will be better than one thinks. Similarly,
 ∼ Conclusion

the desire to continue living may or may not be irrational, but even
if it is, this is the kind of irrationality, unlike a preference for having
come into existence, that should be decisive (at least in practice if
not in theory).
Matters are a little different when the decision to end a life is not
made by an autonomous being for himself, but is instead made on
behalf of a being that lacks the ability to make the judgement for
itself (and has left neither an advance directive nor a durable power
of attorney). These are the hardest cases. Unlike deciding whether
to create a new life, where one can err on the side of caution by not
creating a new life, there is no clear side of caution on which to err
when it comes to ending a life.
Thus I share a version of the third option listed above—that
death is sometimes a harm and sometimes a benefit. This third
option is the common sense view, but my version will deviate from
the usual interpretation of it. That is to say, it is likely that my
version allows for death to be a benefit more often than the usual
view. For example, my view would be more tolerant of rational
suicide than would the common view. Indeed, I would claim
more suicides to be rational than would the common view. In
many cultures (including most western cultures), there is immense
prejudice against suicide. It is often viewed as cowardly²⁰ where
it is not dismissed as a consequence of mental illness. My view
allows the possibility that suicide may more often be rational and
may even be more rational than continuing to exist. This is because
it may be an irrational love for life that keeps many people alive
when their lives have actually become so bad that ceasing to exist
would be better. This is the view expressed by the old woman in
Voltaire’s Candide:
A hundred times I wished to kill myself, but my love of life persisted.
This ridiculous weakness is perhaps one of the most fatal of our faults.
²⁰ In other cultures, interestingly, it is the failure to commit suicide in certain
circumstances that is viewed as being cowardly.

Conclusion ∼ 

For what could be more stupid than to go on carrying a burden that we
always long to lay down? To loathe, and yet cling to, existence? In short,
to cherish the serpent that devours us, until it has eaten our hearts?²¹

This is not to offer a general recommendation of suicide. Suicide, like death from other causes, makes the lives of those who
are bereaved much worse. Rushing into one’s own suicide can
have profound negative impact on the lives of those close to one.
Although an Epicurean may be committed to not caring about what
happens after his death, it is still the case that the bereaved suffer a
harm even if the deceased does not. That suicide harms those who
are thereby bereaved is part of the tragedy of coming into existence. We find ourselves in a kind of trap. We have already come
into existence. To end our existence causes immense pain to those
we love and for whom we care. Potential procreators would do
well to consider this trap they lay when they produce offspring. It
is not the case that one can create new people on the assumption
that if they are not pleased to have come into existence they can
simply kill themselves. Once somebody has come into existence
and attachments with that person have been formed, suicide can
cause the kind of pain that makes the pain of childlessness mild by
comparison. Somebody contemplating suicide knows (or should
know) this. This places an important obstacle in the way of suicide.
One’s life may be bad, but one must consider what affect ending it
would have on one’s family and friends. There will be times when
life has become so bad that it is unreasonable for the interests of
the loved ones in having the person alive to outweigh that person’s
interests in ceasing to exist. When this is true will depend in part
on particular features of the person for whom continued life is a
burden. Different people are able to bear different magnitudes of
burden. It may even be indecent for family members to expect that
person to continue living. On other occasions one’s life may be bad
but not so bad as to warrant killing oneself and thereby making
²¹ Voltaire, Candide (London: Penguin Books, ) –.

 ∼ Conclusion

the lives of one’s family and friends still much worse than they
already are.

RELIGIOUS VIEWS
There are some people who will reject, on religious grounds, the
views that coming into existence is always a harm and that we
ought not to have children. For some such people, the Biblical
injunction to ‘be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth’²² will
constitute a refutation of my views. Such a response assumes, of
course, that God exists. This is no place to discuss God’s existence.
Whether or not the (mono-)theists are right, God never came into
existence. If they are right, God always existed, and if they are
wrong God never existed. Moreover, what I have said about the
quality of human (and animal) life would not entail anything about
the quality of Divine life. And thus I leave aside the question of
God’s existence.
The religious response also assumes that Biblical imperatives
are the expression of what God requires of us. This may seem
uncontroversial for those who accept that the Bible is the word
of God. However, very many Biblical commandments are not
thought to be binding, even by religious people. For example, no
religion I know of currently endorses, as a practical matter, putting to death one’s rebellious son, the Biblical commandment to do
so notwithstanding.²³ Even the commandment to be fruitful and
multiply is not viewed as absolute. For example, Catholicism must
exempt priests and nuns from procreation, given that it forbids
those occupying such positions from engaging in the intercourse
that leads to procreation and prohibits procreation by non-sexual
means. Whereas Catholics permit procreation (in the context of
marriage) for others, the Shakers advocated celibacy for everybody,
including married couples.
²² Genesis :.

²³ Deuteronomy :–.

Conclusion ∼ 

A third and more interesting response to the religious argument
is that the religious argument assumes too monolithic a view of
religion. Although any one religion is often thought and said to
speak with one voice on any given topic, there is in fact a range
of divergent views even within a single religion and within a single
denomination of a religion. Brief illustration of this can be provided
with reference to one’s coming into existence.
The epigraphs at the beginning of Chapter  show both Jeremiah and Job ruing their births. Job regrets his having been conceived
and the fact that he did not die in utero or at birth. Jeremiah goes
further and curses the man who did not abort him. It is striking
how different such views are from those of the cheery fundamentalist with an unsophisticated, monolithic view of the right way.
Whereas Jeremiah and Job think and speak freely—even challenge
God himself—all too few religious believers follow suit. For them
piety precludes such critical thinking and speaking.
Now it might be suggested that both Jeremiah and Job regretted their own existences for reasons specific to the content of their
lives—because, for one reason or another, the quality of their lives
was poor. On this view, there are some lives of which it is true that
it would have been better had they not been started, but it is not
true of all lives. That view seems at odds with the epigraph from
Ecclesiastes at the beginning of this chapter. Those verses show a
Biblical author envying all those who have not come into existence.
Nor is the Bible the only religious text in which we find alternative religious views about the disvalue of coming into existence.
The Talmud,²⁴ for example, briefly records the subject of a fascinating debate between two famous early rabbinic schools—the
House of Hillel and the House of Shammai. We are told that they
debated the question whether or not it was better for humans to
have been created. The House of Hillel, known for its generally
more lenient and humane views, maintained that it was indeed
²⁴ Tractate Eruvin b.

 ∼ Conclusion

better that humans were created. The House of Shammai maintained, by contrast, that it would have been better had humans not
been created. The Talmud relates that these two schools debated
the matter for two and a half years and the issue was eventually
settled in favour of the House of Shammai. This is particularly
noteworthy, because in cases of disagreement between these two
schools, the law almost always follows the House of Hillel. Yet
here we have a decision in favour of Shammai, endorsing the view
that it would have been better had humans not been created. This
kind of second-guessing of God would not cross the minds of the
self-consciously pious. But the fact remains that religious traditions
can embody views that superficial religious thinkers would take to
be antithetical to religiosity. Recognition of this might prevent a
quick dismissal of my views on religious grounds.

M I S A N T H RO P Y A N D P H I L A N T H RO P Y
The conclusions I have reached will strike many people as deeply
misanthropic. I have argued that life is filled with unpleasantness
and suffering, that we should avoid having children, and that it
would be best if humanity came to an end sooner rather than later.
This may sound like misanthropy. However, the overwhelming
thrust of my arguments, as they apply to humans, is philanthropic,
not misanthropic. Because my arguments apply not only to
humans but also to other sentient animals, my arguments are
also zoophilic (in the non-sexual sense of that term). Bringing a
sentient life into existence is a harm to the being whose life it is. My
arguments suggest that it is wrong to inflict this harm. To argue
against the infliction of harm arises from concern for, not dislike
of, those who would be harmed. It may seem like an odd kind of
philanthropy—one that if acted upon, would lead to the end of
all anthropos. It is, however, the most effective way of preventing

Conclusion ∼ 

suffering. Not creating a person absolutely guarantees that that
potential person will not suffer—because that person will not exist.
Although the arguments I have advanced have not been misanthropic, there is a superb misanthropic argument against having
children and in favour of human extinction. This argument rests
on the indisputable premiss that humans cause colossal amounts
of suffering—both for humans and for non-human animals. In
Chapter , I provided a brief sketch of the kind of suffering humans
inflict on one another. In addition to this, they are the cause of
untold suffering to other species. Each year, humans inflict suffering on billions of animals that are reared and killed for food and
other commodities or used in scientific research. Then there is the
suffering inflicted on those animals whose habitat is destroyed by
encroaching humans, the suffering caused to animals by pollution
and other environmental degradation, and the gratuitous suffering
inflicted out of pure malice.
Although there are many non-human species—especially carnivores—that also cause a lot of suffering, humans have the unfortunate distinction of being the most destructive and harmful species
on earth. The amount of suffering in the world could be radically
reduced if there were no more humans. Even if the misanthropic
argument is not taken to this extreme, it can be used to defend at
least a radical reduction of the human population.
Although the end of humanity would greatly reduce the amount
of harm, it would not end it all. The remaining sentient beings
would continue to suffer and their coming into existence could
still be a harm. This is one reason why the misanthropic argument does not go as far as the arguments I have advanced in
this book—arguments that arise not from antipathy towards the
human species but rather from concern about harms to all sentient
beings. Moreover, as resistant as people are to the philanthropic
argument, they would be still more resistant to the misanthropic
one. But the misanthropic argument is not in the least incompatible
with the philanthropic one.
 ∼ Conclusion

It is unlikely that many people will take to heart the conclusion
that coming into existence is always a harm. It is even less likely
that many people will stop having children. By contrast, it is quite
likely that my views either will be ignored or will be dismissed. As
this response will account for a great deal of suffering between now
and the demise of humanity, it cannot plausibly be thought of as
philanthropic. That is not to say that it is motivated by any malice
towards humans, but it does result from a self-deceptive indifference to the harm of coming into existence.

Conclusion ∼ 

This page intentionally left blank

Bibliography
Andrews, Frank M., and Withey, Stephen B., Social Indicators of WellBeing: Americans’ Perspectives of Life Quality (New York: Plenum Press,
).
Bayles, Michael, Morality and Population Policy (University of Alabama
Press, ).
Benatar, David, ‘Why it is Better Never to Come into Existence’, American
Philosophical Quarterly, / () –.
‘Cloning and Ethics’, QJMed,  () –.
‘The Wrong of Wrongful Life’, American Philosophical Quarterly,
/ () –.
‘To Be or Not to Have Been?: Defective Counterfactual Reasoning
About One’s Own Existence’, International Journal of Applied Philosophy,
/ () –.
(ed.) Life, Death and Meaning (Lanham MD: Rowman & Littlefield,
).
‘Sexist Language: Alternatives to the Alternatives’, Public Affairs
Quarterly, / () –.
and Benatar, Michael, ‘A Pain in the Fetus: Ending Confusion about
Fetal Pain’, Bioethics, / () –.
Beyer, Lisa, ‘Be Fruitful and Multiply: Criticism of the ultra-Orthodox
fashion for large families is coming from inside the community’, Time,
 October , .
Blackstone, William T., (ed.) Philosophy and Environmental Crisis (Athens:
University of Georgia Press, ) –.
Boonin, David, ‘Against the Golden Rule Argument Against Abortion’,
Journal of Applied Philosophy, / () –.
A Defense of Abortion (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
).
Boorse, Christopher, ‘On the Distinction between Disease and Illness’,
Philosophy and Public Affairs, / () –.
Bowring, Philip, ‘For Love of Country’, Time,  September , .
Breetvelt, I. S., and van Dam, F. S. A. M., ‘Underreporting by Cancer
Patients: the Case of Response Shift’, Social Science and Medicine, /
() –.

Brickman, Philip, Coates, Dan, and Janoff-Bulman, Ronnie, ‘Lottery Winners and Accident Victims: Is Happiness Relative?’, Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, / () –.
Brown, Jonathon D., and Dutton, Keith A., ‘Truth and Consequences:
the Costs and Benefits of Accurate Self-Knowledge’, Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, / () –.
Buchanan, Allen, Brock, Dan, Daniels, Norman, and Wikler, Daniel, From
Chance to Choice (New York: Cambridge University Press, ).
Burkett, Elinor, The Baby Boon: How Family-Friendly America Cheats the
Childless, (New York: The Free Press, ).
Cameron, Paul, Titus, Donna G., Kostin, John, and Kostin, Marilyn, ‘The
Life Satisfaction of Nonnormal Persons’, Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,  () –.
Campbell, Angus, Converse, Philip E., and Rodgers, Willard L., The Quality of American Life (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, ).
Craig, K. D., Whitfield, M. F., Grunau, R. V., Linton, J., and Hadjistavropoulos, H. D., ‘Pain in the Preterm Neonate: Behavioural and
Physiological Indices’, Pain, / () –.
Diener, Ed., and Diener, Carol, ‘Most People are Happy’, Psychological
Science, / () –.
Suh, Eunkook M., Lucas, Richard E., and Smith, Heidi L., ‘Subjective Well-Being: Three Decades of Progress’, Psychological Bulletin, /
() –.
Easterlin, Richard A., ‘Explaining Happiness’, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, / () –.
‘The Economics of Happiness’, Daedalus, Spring , –.
Economist, The, ‘The incredible shrinking country’, The Economist, 
November , –.
Elliot, Robert, ‘Regan on the Sorts of Beings that Can Have Rights’, Southern Journal of Philosophy,  () –.
Fehige, Christoph, ‘A Pareto Principle for Possible People’, in Fehige,
Christoph, and Wessels, Ulla, (eds.) Preferences (Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter, ) –.
Feinberg, Joel, ‘The Rights of Animals and Unborn Generations’, Rights,
Justice and the Bounds of Liberty (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
) –.
‘Wrongful Life and the Counterfactual Element in Harming’, in
Freedom and Fulfilment (Princeton: Princeton University Press, )
–.

 ∼ Bibliography

Feldman, Fred, ‘Some Puzzles About the Evil of Death’, Philosophical
Review, / () –.
Flaubert, Gustave, The Letters of Gustave Flaubert –, trans. Francis Steegmuller (London: Faber & Faber, ).
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, ‘Undernourishment Around the World’, <http://www.fao/org/DOCREP//
yE/ye.htm> (accessed  November ).
Freud, Sigmund, The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of
Sigmund Freud, vii, trans. James Strachey (London: The Hogarth Press,
).
Frey, R. G., ‘Rights, Interests, Desires and Beliefs’, American Philosophical
Quarterly, / () –.
Greenwald, Anthony G., ‘The Totalitarian Ego: Fabrication and Revision
of Personal History’, American Psychologist, / () –.
Griffin, James, Well-Being (Oxford: Clarendon Press, ).
Hacker, Andrew, ‘The Case Against Kids’, The New York Review of Books,
/ () –.
Hare, R. M., ‘Abortion and the Golden Rule’, Philosophy and Public Affairs,
/ () –.
‘A Kantian Approach to Abortion’, Essays on Bioethics (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, ) –.
Haub, Carl, ‘How Many People Have Ever Lived on Earth?’, <http://
www.prb.org/Content/ContentGroups/PTarticle/Oct-Dec/How
Many People Have Ever Lived on Earth .htm> (accessed  October ).
Headey, Bruce, and Wearing, Alexander, ‘Personality, Life Events, and
Subjective Well-Being: Toward a Dynamic Equilibrium Model’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, / () –.
Heine, Heinrich, Morphine, lines –.
Holtug, Nils, ‘On the value of coming into existence’, The Journal of Ethics,
 () –.
Hunger Project, The, <http://www.thp.org> (accessed November ).
Inglehart, Ronald, Culture Shift in Advanced Industrial Society (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, ).
Jackson, Holbrook, (ed.) The Complete Nonsense of Edward Lear (London:
Faber & Faber, ) .
Kagan, Shelly, The Limits of Morality (Oxford: Clarendon Press, ).
Kates, Carol A., ‘Reproductive Liberty and Overpopulation’, Environmental Values,  () –.

Bibliography ∼ 

Kaufman. Frederik, ‘Pre-Vital and Post-Mortem Non-Existence’, American
Philosophical Quarterly, / () –.
Kavka, Gregory S., ‘The Paradox of Future Individuals’, Philosophy and
Public Affairs, / () –.
Krug, Etienne G., Dahlbeg, Linda L., Mercy, James A., Zwi, Anthony B.,
and Lozano, Rafael, (eds.) The World Health Report  (Geneva:
WHO, ).
Legman, G., The Limerick:  Examples with Notes, Variants and Index
(New York: Bell Publishing Company, ).
Lenman, James, ‘On Becoming Extinct’, Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 
() –.
Leslie, John, The End of the World: The Science and Ethics of Human Extinction (London: Routledge, ).
McGuire, Bill, A Guide to the End of the World (New York: Oxford University Press, ).
McMahan, Jeff, The Ethics of Killing: Problems at the Margins of Life (New
York: Oxford University Press, ).
McMichael, Anthony, Human Frontiers, Environments and Disease (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ).
Marquis, Don, ‘Why Abortion is Immoral’, The Journal of Philosophy, /
() –.
‘Justifying the Rights of Pregnancy: The Interest View’, Criminal
Justice Ethics, / () –.
Maslow, Abraham, Motivation and Personality, nd edn. (New York: Harper & Row Publishers, ).
Matlin, Margaret W., and Stang, David J., The Pollyanna Principle: Selectivity in Language, Memory and Thought (Cambridge MA: Schenkman Publishing Company, ).
May, Elaine Tyler, ‘Nonmothers as Bad Mothers: Infertility and the
Maternal Instinct’, in Molly Ladd-Taylor and Lauri Umansky, ‘Bad’
Mothers: The Politics of Blame in Twentieth-Century America (New York:
NYU Press, ) –.
Mehnert, Thomas., Krauss, Herbert H., Nadler, Rosemary., Boyd, Mary.,
‘Correlates of Life Satisfaction in Those with Disabling Conditions’,
Rehabilitative Psychology, / () –.
Mill, John Stuart, Principles of Political Economy (London: Longmans,
Green & Co., ).
Missner, Marshall, ‘Why Have Children?’, The International Journal of
Applied Philosophy, / () –.

 ∼ Bibliography

Montesquieu, Persian Letters, trans. John Davidson,  (London: Gibbings
& Company, ).
Multi-Society Task Force on PVS, ‘Medical Aspects of the Persistent
Vegetative State’, New England Journal of Medicine, / ()
–.
Myers, David G., and Diener, Ed, ‘The Pursuit of Happiness’, Scientific
American, / () –.
Nash, Ogden, Family Reunion (London: J. M. Dent & Sons Ltd, ).
Nozick, Robert, Anarchy, State and Utopia (Oxford: Blackwell, ).
Parfit, Derek, Reasons and Persons (Oxford: Clarendon Press, ).
Pence, Gregory E., Classic Cases in Medical Ethics, nd edn. (New York,
McGraw-Hill, ).
People and Planet, <http://www.peopleandplanet.net> (accessed  October ).
Pitcher, George, ‘The Misfortunes of the Dead’, American Philosophical
Quarterly, / () –.
Porter, Eleanor H., Pollyanna, (London: George G. Harrap & Co. ).
Rawls, John, ‘Justice as Fairness: Political not Metaphysical’, Philosophy
and Public Affairs, / () –.
Rees, Martin, Our Final Hour: A Scientist’s Warning (New York: Basic
Books, ).
Regan, Tom, ‘Feinberg on What Sorts of Beings Can Have Rights?’,
Southern Journal of Philosophy,  () –.
Reuters, ‘Brace yerself Sheila, it’s your patriotic duty to breed’, Cape
Times, Thursday  May , .
Richards, Norvin, ‘Is Humility a Virtue?’, American Philosophical Quarterly,
/ () –.
Robertson, John, Children of Choice (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
).
Rummel, R. J., Death by Government (New Brunswick, Transaction Publishers, ).
Santayana, George, Reason in Religion (vol. iii of The Life of Reason) (New
York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, ).
Schopenhauer, Arthur, ‘On the Sufferings of the World’, in Complete
Essays of Schopenhauer, trans. T. Bailey Saunders (New York: Willey
Book Company, ).
The World as Will and Representation, trans. E. F. J. Payne (New
York: Dover Publications, ).

Bibliography ∼ 

Schwartz, Pedro, The New Political Economy of J.S. Mill (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, ).
Shiffrin, Seana Valentine, ‘Wrongful Life, Procreative Responsibility, and
the Significance of Harm’, Legal Theory,  () –.
Singer, Peter, Kuhse, Helga, Buckle, Stephen, Dawson, Karen, and
Kasimba, Pascal, (eds.) Embryo Experimentation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ).
Singer, Peter, Practical Ethics nd edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, ).
Smilansky, Saul, ‘Is There a Moral Obligation to Have Children?, Journal
of Applied Philosophy, / () –.
Sophocles, ‘Oedipus at Colonus’.
Steinbock, Bonnie, Life Before Birth (New York: Oxford University Press,
) –.
Suh, Eunkook., Diener, Ed, and Fujita, Frank, ‘Events and Subjective
Well-Being: Only Recent Events Matter’, Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, / () –.
Suits, David B., ‘Why death is not bad for the one who died’, American
Philosophical Quarterly, / () –.
Tännsjö, Torbjörn, Hedonistic Utilitarianism (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, ).
‘Doom Soon?’, Inquiry, / () –.
Taylor, Paul W., Respect for Nature (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
).
Taylor, Shelley E., Positive Illusions: Creative Self-Deception and the Healthy
Mind (New York: Basic Books, ).
and Brown, Jonathon D., ‘Illusion and Well-Being: A Social
Psychological Perspective on Mental Health’, Psychological Bulletin,
/ () –.
Tennyson, Alfred Lord, ‘In Memoriam’.
Thompson, Janna, ‘A Refutation of Environmental Ethics’, Environmental
Ethics, / () –.
Tiger, Lionel, Optimism: The Biology of Hope (New York: Simon &
Schuster, ).
Tooley, Michael, ‘Abortion and Infanticide’, Philosophy and Public Affairs,
/ () –.
Toubia, Nahid, ‘Female Circumcision as a Public Health Issue’, New England Journal of Medicine, / () –.

 ∼ Bibliography

Vetter, Hermann, ‘Utilitarianism and New Generations’, Mind, /
() –.
Voltaire, Candide, (London: Penguin Books, ).
Waller, Bruce N., ‘The Sad Truth: Optimism, Pessimism and Pragmatism’, Ratio, new series,  () –.
Wasserman, David, ‘Is Every Birth Wrongful? Is Any Birth Morally
Required?’, DeCamp Bioethics Lecture, Princeton,  February ,
unpublished manuscript.
Watts, Jonathan, ‘Japan opens dating agency to improve birth rate’, The
Lancet,  () .
Weinberg, Rivka, ‘Procreative Justice: A Contractualist Account’, Public
Affairs Quarterly, / () –.
Weinstein, Neil D., ‘Unrealistic Optimism about Future Life Events’,
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, / () –.
‘Why it Won’t Happen to Me: Perceptions of Risk Factors and Susceptibility’, Health Psychology, / () –.
Williams, Bernard, ‘The Makropulos Case: Reflections on the Tedium of
Immortality’ in Problems of the Self (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, ).
‘Resenting one’s own existence’ in Making Sense of Humanity
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ).
Wood, Joanne V., ‘What is Social Comparison and How Should We
Study it?’, Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, / () –.
World Heath Organization, World Report on Violence and Health (Geneva:
WHO, ).
Yerxa, Elizabeth J., and Baum, Susan, ‘Engagement in Daily Occupations
and Life-Satisfaction Among People with Spinal Cord Injuries’, The
Occupational Therapy Journal of Research, / () –.

Bibliography ∼ 

This page intentionally left blank

Index
abortion , –, 
coercive –
and contraception –
and the harm principle –
and impairments , 
and religion 
accommodation, see adaptation
adaptation –, , , , ,  n.
adaptive preferences, see adaptation
adoption ,  n. , , 
Allen, Woody  n 
animals , 
breeding , , 
extinction  n.
and interests –, –, 
suffering , , 
valuable future 
anti-frustrationism, see frustrationism
anti-natalism –,  n
counter-intuitiveness –
and extinction , –, 
policies 
and Theory X –
varieties , 
see also pro-natalism; regretting one’s
existence
artificial reproduction –
assisted reproduction  n, , –
asymmetry:
of duties –, , 
of harms and benefits –, –,
–, , –
Australia 
Bayles, Michael 
Buddhists 
Candide, see Voltaire
caution , , –, 
China 
cloning  n, , –
comparison, social , , , ,
–

conception , , 
accidental versus witting 
and coming into existence , ,
–, –
pre- 
timing of , 
via sex 
consciousness , –, , , 
consent , , , 
hypothetical –
contraception , , , , 
advocating  n. 
and future-like-ours argument –
Cowart, Donald (‘Dax’) 
deprivation , , , , , , 
absence of , , , , , –, ,
, , 
by death , –, –
of liberty , 
desire fulfilment theories , –, 
desire to continue living 
disability , , , , , –
social construction of –, –
disease , , ,  n. , 
duty to procreate, see procreation
electroencephalogram (EEG) –
Epicurus –
expressivist argument –, –
extinction –, –, 
Fehige, Christoph , –,  n 
Feinberg, Joel ,  n. , –,  n,
–
Flaubert, Gustave 
Freud, Sigmund –
Frey, Raymond –, 
frustrationism –, –
future-life case –, , ; see also
life (not) worth starting
future-like-ours argument, see Marquis,
Don

Golden Rule argument, see Hare,
Richard
grumble theory  n. ; see also
treadmill of desires
habituation, see adaptation
Hare, Richard –
harm principle –
H(ealthy) and S(ick), see S(ick) and
H(ealthy)
hedonistic theories , –, , 
Heine, Heinrich 
hierarchy of needs ; see also treadmill
of desires
Hillel –
Holtug, Nils 
hunger , ,  n. 
deaths 
and enjoyment of food , , 
prevention , 
relief , , 
unpleasantness , 
impairments –, –,
–
impersonal views –, –
inabilities, see impairments
infanticide , 
Inglehart, Ronald 
interests:
biotic –, –
coital 
conscious –, 
in continued existence , –,
, , see also desire to
continue living
functional –, –
life 
and moral considerability –
parenting , , , 
procreative , , , 
reflective , , 
time-relative 
as want –, 
as well-being –, 
Japan 
Jeremiah , 
Job , 
jokes –,  n. ,  n, , 



∼

Index

life:
(not) worth continuing –, , ,
, , , , , , ,
–
(not) worth living –, , , ,
 n. , , , –, , 
(not) worth starting , , –,
–, , –, , , ,
–, 
wrongful, see wrongful life
see also quality of life
loving and losing, distinguished from
coming into existence –
luck , , , 
not to have come into existence , ,
, –
Lucretius , 
McMahan, Jeff  n. ,  n. , 
Marquis, Don  n. , , –
Maslow, Abraham –
mass-killing 
maximin –, 
mere addition , –, 
Mill, John Stuart ,  n. 
minimally decent life, see life (not)
worth living
misanthropy –
narcissism 
natural disasters 
non-identity problem –, , 
anticipated by Sigmund Freud 
distinguished from disability rights
objection 
and impersonal views –, 
and person-affecting views ,
–, –
and Theory X , 
objective list theories –, –, 
optimism ,  n. , –, , ,
–
tendency towards , –,  n. ,

paradox of future individuals, see
non-identity problem
Parfit, Derek , n

on compensated and
uncompensated suffering  n.

on harm  n. 
origin view  n. &
population problems –, –,
, , 
psychological continuity 
saving life just after it starts 
see also impersonal views; mere
addition; non-identity problem;
person-affecting views,
repugnant conclusion; Theory
X
person-affecting views , , –,

pessimism , , –, –
pollyannaism –, , , , , ,
, ,  n., see also optimism
procreation , –, , , 
and contractarianism , 
and extinction , 
and religion 
see also anti-natalism; asymmetry of
duties; right to procreative
freedom
preference not to have existed –,
–, 
see also regretting one’s existence
present-life case –, , ; see also
life (not) worth continuing
pro-natalism –, 
see also anti-natalism
pure benefit –
quality of life –, –,
future , 
Jeremiah and Job 
and population –, –
relevance to death , , 
See also disability; life (not) worth
continuing; life (not) worth
starting; life (not) worth living
Rawls, John , , 
reductio ad absurdum  n. , ,
–
Regan, Tom –,  n.
regretting one’s existence –, ,
–, , , 

see also Allen, Woody; Jeremiah; Job;
preference not to have existed
reproduction, see artificial
reproduction; assisted
reproduction; anti-natalism;
procreation
reproductive freedom, see right to
procreative freedom
repugnant conclusion , –, 
right:
not to be created –, –
to abortion 
to citizenship 
to continued life –; see also
interests in continued existence
to do wrong 
to immigrate 
to procreative freedom , –,
, , 
violation of a , 
Schopenhauer, Arthur , –,  n.
, , 
sentience , , , 
sexual ethics –, 
Shammai –
Shiffrin, Seana –, 
S(ick) and H(ealthy), analogy of –,
, 
Singapore 
Singer, Peter  n. , 
social comparison, see comparison,
social
Stoics 
sub specie aeternitatis –, 
sub specie humanitatis –
suicide , –, –
Tännsjö, Torbjörn  n.
Taylor, Paul W. –
Theory X –, –
Tooley, Michael –
treadmill of desires –
utilitarianism –, , , 
Voltaire , 
Weinberg, Rivka  n. , ,  n. 
wrongful life  n. ,  n. , –,
–

Index ∼ 

