Principles of Philosophy
René Descartes

Copyright © Jonathan Bennett 2017. All rights reserved
[Brackets] enclose editorial explanations. Small ·dots· enclose material that has been added, but can be read
as though it were part of the original text. Occasional •bullets, and also indenting of passages that are not
quotations, are meant as aids to grasping the structure of a sentence or a thought. The basis from which this
text was constructed was the translation by John Cottingham (Cambridge University Press), which is strongly
recommended. Each four-point ellipsis . . . . indicates the omission of a short passage that seemed to be more
trouble than it is worth. Longer omissions are reported between square brackets in normal-sized type.—Descartes
wrote this work in Latin. A French translation appeared during his life-time, and he evidently saw and approved
some of its departures from or additions to the Latin. A few of these will be incorporated, usually without
sign-posting, in the present version.—When a section starts with a hook to something already said, it’s a hook to
•the thought at the end of the preceding section, not to •its own heading. In the definitive Adam and Tannery
edition of Descartes’s works, and presumably also in the first printing of the Principles, those items were not
headings but marginal summaries.

First launched: March 2008

Last amended: January 2012 (a confusion relating to II.15)

Contents
Part 1: The principles of human knowledge

1

Part 2: The principles of material things

22

Part 3: The visible universe

42

Part 4: The earth

58

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

1: Human knowledge

Part 1: The principles of human knowledge

ham’s translation—translates praejudicatum. Sometimes, for a change, it

4. The reasons for doubt regarding sense-perceptible things.
When we’re focussed on the search for truth, we’ll begin by
doubting the existence of the objects of sense-perception and
imagination. There are two reasons for this. (1) We have
occasionally found our senses to be in error, and it’s not wise
to place much trust in anyone or anything that has deceived
us even once. (2) In our sleep we regularly seem to see or
imagine things that don’t exist anywhere; and while we are
doubting there seem to be no absolutely reliable criteria to
distinguish being asleep from being awake.
5. The reasons for doubting even mathematical demonstra-

will be translated as ‘prejudice’, but always meaning something believed

tions.

1. The seeker after truth must once in his lifetime doubt
everything that he can doubt.

We’re bound to have many preconceived opinions that keep
us from knowledge of the truth, because in our infancy,
before we had the full use of our reason, we made all sorts of
judgments about things presented to our senses. The only
way to free ourselves from these opinions, it seems, is just
once in our lives to take the trouble to doubt everything in
which we find even the tiniest suspicion of uncertainty. [Here
and throughout this work, ‘preconceived opinion’—following Cotting-

in advance, believed long ago and then hung onto. It lacks much of the

We’ll also doubt other things that we used to regard as
perfectly certain—even rigorous mathematical proofs, even
principles that we used to regard as self-evident. ·There
are two reasons for this too·. (1) We have sometimes seen
other people make mistakes in such matters, accepting as
utterly certain and self-evident propositions that seemed
false to us. (2) More important: we have been told that we
were created by a God who can do anything. Well, for all
we know he may have wanted to make us beings of such a
kind that we are always wrong in our beliefs, even ones that
seem to us supremely evident. ·This may seem extravagant,
but it shouldn’t be brushed aside·. We have encountered
some cases of error about something of which the person
was perfectly certain, and it’s equally possible that certainty
is always accompanied by error. ‘Mightn’t we have been
brought into existence not by a supremely powerful God but
by ourselves or by some other creator?’ Yes, but the less
powerful our creator is, the more likely it is that we’re an
imperfect product that is deceived all the time!

force of ‘prejudice’ as we use that word today.]

2. What is doubtful should even be considered as false.
It will be useful ·to go even further than that·: when we doubt
something we should think of it as outright false, because
this will bring more thoroughly into the open truths that are
certainly true and easy to know.
3. But this doubt shouldn’t be carried over into everyday life.
While this doubt continues, it should be kept in check and
used only in thinking about the truth. In ordinary practical
affairs we often have to act on the basis of what is merely
probable, not having time to hold off until we could free
ourselves from our doubts. Sometimes we may—·for practical reasons·—even have to choose between two alternatives
without finding either of them to be more probable than the
other.

1

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

6. We have free will, enabling us to avoid error by refusing to

1: Human knowledge

my knowledge of my thought is more basic and more certain
than my knowledge of any corporeal thing.

assent to anything doubtful.

Still, whoever created us and however powerful and however
deceitful he may be, we experience within ourselves a freedom to hold off from believing things that aren’t completely
certain and thoroughly examined. So we can guard ourselves
against ever going wrong.

9. What is meant by ‘thought’.
I take the word ‘thought’ to cover everything that we are
aware of as happening within us, and it counts as ‘thought’
because we are aware of it. That includes not only understanding, willing and imagining, but also sensory awareness.
·To see some of the force of this, let’s connect it with the
thought-experiment I conducted in section 7·. Consider
these two inferences:
I am seeing, therefore I exist.
I am walking, therefore I exist.
If I am using ‘seeing’ and ‘walking’ to name bodily activities,
then neither inference is secure, because I might think I am
seeing or walking in that sense at a time when my eyes are
closed and I’m not moving about (this happens in dreams); I
might even think that I am seeing or walking at a time when
I don’t have a body at all. But if I use ‘seeing’ and ‘walking’
as labels for the actual sense of or awareness of seeing or
walking, then the inferences are perfectly secure, because
they don’t go beyond the mind, which senses or thinks that
it is seeing or walking.

7. We can’t doubt that we exist while we are doubting; and
this is the first thing we come to know when we philosophize
in an orderly way.

In rejecting everything that we can in any way doubt, even
pretending to think it false, we can easily suppose that
there’s no God and no heaven, that there are no bodies—so
that we don’t have bodies, hands and feet and so on. But we
can’t suppose that we, who are having such thoughts, are
nothing! ‘At a time when I am thinking, I don’t exist’—that’s
self-contradictory. So this item of knowledge—I’m thinking,
so I exist—is the first and most certain thing to occur to
anyone who philosophizes in an orderly way.
8. In this way we discover how soul and body differ, i.e. what
the difference is between a thinking thing and a corporeal
one.

10. Logical definitions for very simple and self-evident mat-

This is the best way to discover what sort of thing the mind
is, and how it differs from the body. How does it do that?

ters only make them more obscure. Don’t think of •such
items of knowledge as hard to discover.

[Descartes answers this in terms of ‘we’; this version uses the singular ‘I’
just for clarity’s sake.] Well, here I am supposing that everything

I’m not going to explain many of the other terms (·in addition
to ‘thought’·) that I have already used or will use later on,
because they strike me as being sufficiently self-explanatory.
I have often noticed that philosophers make the mistake
of trying to explain things that were already very simple
and self-evident, by producing logical definitions that make
things worse! When I said that the proposition I am thinking,
therefore I exist is ‘the first and most certain thing to occur

other than myself is unreal, while wondering what sort of
thing I am. I can see clearly that I don’t have any of the
properties that bodies have—I don’t have a spatial size or
shape, and I don’t move—because those properties all fall
on the supposed-to-be-unreal side of the line, whereas we’ve
just seen that I can’t suppose that I am unreal. So I find
that the only property I can ascribe to myself is thought. So
2

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

1: Human knowledge

to anyone who philosophizes in an orderly way’, I wasn’t
meaning to deny that one must first know •what thought,
existence and certainty are, and know •that it’s impossible
for something to think while it doesn’t exist, and the like.
But these are utterly simple notions, which don’t on their
own give us knowledge of anything that exists; so I didn’t
think they needed to be listed.

existence than of the existence of anything else, but they
haven’t seen that this certainty required that ‘they’ were
minds. Instead of that, they thought that ‘they’ were only
bodies—the bodies that they saw with their eyes and touched
with their hands, the bodies that they wrongly credited with
the power of sense-perception. That’s what prevented them
from perceiving the nature of the mind.

11. How our mind is better known than our body.

13. The sense in which knowledge of everything else depends

The knowledge of our mind is not simply prior to and (1) more
certain than the knowledge of our body, but is also (2) more
evident. [Descartes is here distinguishing (1) being rightly sure that P
is true from (2) having a good grasp of why P is true.] To see why this
is so, we need to take account of something that the natural
light clearly shows us, namely that nothingness doesn’t have
any attributes or qualities. This implies that wherever we
find some attributes or qualities there must be some thing
or substance that they belong to; and the more attributes
we discover in a single •thing or substance the more brightly
open is our knowledge of •it. Well, we find more attributes
in our mind than in anything else, because anything that
gives me knowledge of something other than myself has to
lead me to a much surer knowledge of my own mind. For
example, if I think that the earth exists because I touch it or
see it, this very fact supports even more strongly my belief
that my mind exists; because my basis for thinking that the
earth exists is compatible with the earth’s not existing, but
it isn’t compatible with my mind’s not existing! And that’s
just one example out of many.

on knowledge of God.

So the mind, knowing itself but still in doubt about everything else, casts about for ways to extend its knowledge.
•First, it finds within itself ideas of many things; and it can’t
be mistaken about these ideas, as distinct from other things
that may resemble them, ·i.e. other things that they may
be ideas of ·. •Next, it finds ·within itself· certain ‘common
notions’, from which it constructs various proofs; and while it
is attending to them the mind is completely convinced of their
truth. [The phrase ‘common notion’ is an unavoidable translation of
Descartes’s communis notio. It’s a technical term, referring not to notions
or ideas but to whole propositions, specifically ones that are elementarily

For example, the mind
contains ideas of numbers and shapes, and also has such
common notions as:
•If you add equals to equals the results will be equal;
from which it’s easy to demonstrate that the three angles of
a triangle equal two right angles and the like. So the mind
will be convinced of the truth of this conclusion and others
like it, for as long as it is attending to the premisses from
which it deduced them. But it can’t attend to them all the
time, and ·during times when it is not doing so, doubts can
start up again·. At such a time, the mind can think like this:
‘I still don’t know that I wasn’t created with a nature
that would make me go wrong even in matters that
and self-evidently true. See section 49.]

12. Why not everyone knows this.
Some philosophers don’t see this, but that’s because they
haven’t done their philosophizing in an orderly way, and
haven’t carefully enough distinguished the mind from the
body. They may have been more certain of their own
3

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

1: Human knowledge

16. To some people it’s not obvious that God must exist;

seem to me most evident, so it’s right for me to doubt
such conclusions.’
So it’s not possible for the mind to have certain knowledge
·that will remain certain even when the basis for it isn’t being
kept consciously and attentively in mind·—it’s not possible,
that is, until the mind comes to know the Author of its being.

that’s because of preconceived opinions.

As I said, our mind will easily accept this if it first completely
frees itself from preconceived opinions. We’re accustomed
to distinguishing (1) essence from (2) existence—·e.g. distinguishing (1) ‘What makes a thing a triangle?’ from (2)
‘Are there any triangles?’·—in connection with all things
other than God. We are also accustomed to sheerly making
up various ideas of things that don’t and never did exist
anywhere. So at a time when we aren’t focussing on ·the
idea of· the supremely perfect being, we can easily suspect
that the idea of God may be one of the ideas that we chose to
invent, or anyway one of the ones that don’t include existence
in their essence.

14. Necessary existence is included in our concept of God—
from which it follow that God exists.

Surveying its various ideas, the mind finds one that stands
out from all the others—it’s the idea of a supremely intelligent, supremely powerful and supremely perfect being.
And unlike other ideas that convey at most that the things
they are ideas of may exist contingently, this idea of God is
clearly seen by the mind to involve God’s necessarily existing
eternally. ·There’s nothing weird or deviant about inferring
God’s existence from the idea of God·. When the mind sees
that the idea of triangle contains having-three-angles-equalto-two-right-angles, it becomes convinced that any triangle
does have three angles equalling two right angles. And the
mind is arguing in the same way when, seeing that the
idea of supremely perfect being contains existing-necessarilyand-eternally, it concludes that a supreme being does exist
·necessarily and eternally·.

17. The greater the representative perfection in any of our
ideas, the greater its cause must be

When we reflect further on our ideas, we see that two or more
ideas that aren’t very different considered merely as modes
of thinking [= ‘psychological episodes’] may differ greatly in what
they represent, i.e. what they are ideas of. And we also see
that the greater the amount of representative perfection an
idea contains, the more perfect its cause must be.
[Descartes means by
‘Idea x contains perfection P representatively’
exactly the same as
‘Idea x represents something as having perfection P’.

15. None of our other concepts contains necessary existence
in this way. All they contain is contingent existence.

The mind will be encouraged to accept this result if it
considers that it can’t find within itself any other idea that
contains necessary existence in this way. And this leads it
to grasp that the idea of a supremely perfect being, far from
being something fanciful that the mind has invented, is ·a
representation of· a true and immutable nature that can’t
not exist, since necessary existence is contained within it.

The terminology of adverbly containing P is potentially misleading; but
we’ll see in a moment that Descartes needs it for the claim he is making

Suppose someone has an idea of a highly
intricate machine. What caused him to have it? That’s a
legitimate question, which might be answered by:
‘He once saw such a machine that had been made by
someone else’, or ‘Being skilled in mechanics (or being
just plain brilliant), he thought it up for himself.’
here to be plausible.]

4

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

All the intricacy that the idea contains merely
representatively—as in a picture—must be contained in
its cause, whatever kind of cause it turns out to be; and it
must be contained not merely •representatively but •actually,
either straightforwardly or in a higher form.

1: Human knowledge

That’s because the natural light
makes it very obvious not only that
•nothing comes from nothing,
but also that
•a thing can’t have as its sole cause something that is
less perfect than it is,
and furthermore that •when we have within us an idea
or likeness of something, there has to be somewhere an
original that actually has all the perfections belonging
·representatively· to the idea. And ·in the case of our idea of
God· the ‘somewhere’ can’t be inside us, because we plainly
don’t have the supreme perfections that our idea of God
represents; so we’re entitled to conclude that what does have
them is something distinct from ourselves, namely God. At
any rate, we can certainly infer that God did have those
perfections when he gave us this idea; which clearly implies
that he still has them.
be in conflict with the Latin.]

[Three points about this paragraph: •Descartes adds ‘. . . at least in the
case of the first and principal cause’. This seems to allow that an idea
representing a certain perfection might be caused by something that has
that perfection via a causal chain whose intermediate members don’t
have it; but that would destroy Descartes’s argument; so perhaps it’s not
what he meant, though it’s hard to read him any other way. Anyway,
this is the only appearance of this thought, and we can safely forget it.
•Descartes and others had the notion of something’s having a property
‘in a higher form’ (Latin: eminenter) mainly so that, for example, God
could cause something to be square or slippery without himself being
straightforwardly square or slippery! •A widely misunderstood fact about
Descartes’s terminology: He distinguishes
(1) containing P representatively from (2) having P actually,
and within the ‘actually’ category he distinguishes
(2a) (actually) having P straightforwardly from (2b) (actually) having P in a higher form.

19. Even if we don’t grasp God’s •nature, his •perfections

The trouble comes from his using one adverb, formaliter, usually trans-

have a more open place in our knowledge than anything else
does.

lated by ‘formally’, sometimes to express (2) as against (1) and sometimes
to express (2a) as against (2b). In the present version, ‘formally’ will not

Anyone who is used to pondering the idea of God and
thinking about his supreme perfections will be sure enough
about this, finding it obvious. We don’t completely get our
minds around these perfections, because we who are finite
couldn’t fully take in the nature of an infinite being; but
we can understand them more vividly and clearly than we
can any corporeal things. Why? Because they permeate our
thought to a greater extent, being simpler and not obscured
by any limitations.

occur.]

18.

This yields a second reason for concluding that God
exists.

So here we are, having within us an idea of God, or a
supreme being, and we’re entitled to ask ‘What caused us to
have this idea?’ We find in the idea—·representatively in the
idea·—such immeasurable greatness that we’re convinced
that it must have been placed in us by something that truly
possesses the sum of all perfections, i.e. by a God who really
exists. [Regarding the choice between ‘God’ and ‘a God’, or between

20. We didn’t make ourselves; God made us; so he exists.
Some people don’t give any thought to this. Usually when
someone has an idea of some intricate machine, he knows—
·because he remembers·—where he got it from; but we have

‘the supreme being’ and ‘a supreme being’: Latin has no such distinction.
The choices made in this version express opinions about which is more
suitable in the given case, but if you disagree in some cases, you won’t

5

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

1: Human knowledge

22. My way of coming to know of God’s •existence brings
with it a knowledge of all his •attributes (or all that can be
known by the natural power of the mind).

always had our idea of God, so we have no memory of getting
it from him, ·and one result is that for many people the
question ‘Where did I get this idea from?’ doesn’t even arise.
But it should arise!· So let us now go on to inquire into the
source of our being, given that we have within us an idea of
the supreme perfections of God. The natural light makes it
blindingly obvious that a thing which recognizes something
more perfect than itself didn’t bring itself into existence, for if
it had done so it would have given itself all the perfections of
which it has an idea. So the source of its being—·the cause
of its existence·—must be something that does have within
itself all these perfections, namely God.
21. The fact that we last through time is sufficient to demon-

This way of proving the existence of God—namely by means
of the idea of God—has a great advantage: it gives us all the
knowledge of what he is that our feeble nature is capable of.
When we reflect on our in-born idea of God, we see that he is
eternal, omniscient, omnipotent, the source of all
goodness and truth, the creator of all things
—in short, that he has every attribute that we can clearly
recognize as involving some perfection that is infinite, i.e.
not limited by any imperfection.
23. God (1) is not corporeal, (2) doesn’t perceive through the

strate the existence of God.

senses as we do, and (3) doesn’t will the evil of sin.

To see how compelling this proof is, you have only to think
about the nature of time, i.e. the nature of things’ duration—
specifically the fact that the parts of time are not mutually
dependent . . . . From the fact that we exist now it doesn’t
follow that we shall exist a moment from now, unless some
cause—the very one that originally produced us—continually
reproduces us, so to speak, i.e. keeps us in existence. We
easily understand •that we have no power to keep ourselves
in existence! Something else it is easy for us to see is •that
he who has enough power to keep us in existence though we
are distinct from him must be well equipped to keep himself
in existence. Or rather (·to put it more accurately, and get
away from this talk about keeping himself in existence·) he
has so much power that he doesn’t need anything else to
keep him in existence. He is, in a word, God.

In many things we recognize some perfection while also
finding them to be imperfect or limited in some way; and
none of these can belong to God. (1) ·It’s a sort of perfection
in bodies that they are extended in space·, but along with
extension the nature of body includes divisibility, and since
divisibility is an imperfection we can be sure that God isn’t
a body. (2) It’s a sort of perfection in us that we have
sense-perception, but this also involves the imperfection
of being acted on by something else and thus being in states
that depend on things other than ourselves. So there’s
no question of supposing that God •perceives by means of
senses ·like ours; our account of his mental activities must
be confined to saying that· he •understands and •wills. Our
understanding and willing involve operations that are, in a
way, distinct one from another; but in God there is always a
single identical and perfectly simple act by means of which
he understands, wills and accomplishes everything all at
once. (3) When I say ‘everything’ I mean all things: for God
doesn’t will the evil of sin, which is not a thing.
6

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

24. In passing from knowledge of God to knowledge of his

1: Human knowledge

Would half an infinite line also be infinite?
Is an infinite number odd or even?
we shan’t bother to answer. No-one has any business
thinking about such matters, it seems to me, unless he
thinks his own mind is infinite! What we’ll do is this: faced
with something that so far as we can see is unlimited in some
respect, we’ll describe it not as ‘infinite’ but as ‘indefinite’.
•An example: we can’t imagine a size so big that we can’t
conceive of the possibility of a bigger; so our answer to the
question ‘How big could a thing be?’ should be ‘Indefinitely
big’. •Another: however many parts a given body is divided
into, we can still conceive of each of those parts as being
further divisible; so our answer to the question ‘How many
parts can a body be divided into?’ is ‘Indefinitely many’. •A
third: no matter how numerous we imagine the stars to be,
we think that God could have created even more; so we’ll
suppose that there’s an indefinite number of stars. And the
same will apply in other cases.

creation, we should bear in mind that he is infinite and we
are finite.

Since God alone is the true cause of everything that does
or could exist, it’s clear that the best way to go about
philosophizing [here = ‘doing philosophy or natural science’] is to
•start from what we know of God himself and •try to derive
from that knowledge an explanation of the things created by
him. That’s the way to acquire the most perfect scientific
knowledge, i.e. knowledge of effects through their causes.
To minimize our chances of going wrong in this process, we
must carefully bear in mind •that God, the creator of all
things, is infinite, and •that we are altogether finite.
25. We must believe everything that God has revealed, even
if it’s more than we can get our minds around.

·Here’s an example of the need for section 24’s reminder·:
Suppose God reveals to us something about himself or others
that is beyond the natural reach of our mind—such as the
mystery of the Incarnation or of the Trinity—we won’t refuse
to believe it although we don’t clearly understand it. And
we won’t be at all surprised that our mental capacity is
outstripped by much in the immeasurable nature of God and
in the things created by him.

27. The difference between the indefinite and the infinite.
The point of using ‘indefinite’ rather than ‘infinite’ is to
reserve ‘infinite’ for God, because he’s the only thing that our
understanding •positively tells us doesn’t have any limits.
The most we know about anything else is the •negative
information that we can’t find any limits in it.

26. We should steer clear of arguments about the infinite.
When we see something as unlimited—e.g. the extension of
the world, the division of the parts of matter, the number of
the stars, and so on—we should regard it ·not as infinite but·
as indefinite.

28. It’s not the •final but the •efficient causes of created

That will spare us tiresome arguments about the infinite.
Given that we are finite, it would be absurd for us to ·try to·
establish any definite results concerning the infinite, because
that would be trying to limit it and get our minds around it.
When questions such as these are asked:

never explain natural things in terms of the purposes that
God or nature may have had when creating them, [added in the
French] and we shall entirely banish them from our natural
science. Why? Because we shouldn’t be so arrogant as to
think that we can share in God’s plans. We should bring

things that we must investigate.
[In contemporary terms, that is equivalent to saying ‘What we must
investigate are not created things’ •purposes but their •causes’.] We’ll

7

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

him in only as the efficient cause of everything that happens.
He has allowed us to have some knowledge of his attributes,
and we’ll find that, starting from that knowledge and using
our God-given natural light, we can draw conclusions about
·the causation of· events that we perceive by our senses. . . .

1: Human knowledge

asleep—then provided we separate it from what is confused
and obscure we’ll easily recognize which are the aspects of it
that may be regarded as true. I needn’t go on about this here,
because I have already dealt with it in the Meditations; and
a more exact treatment of the topic would require knowledge
of things that I’ll be saying later on.

29. God is not the cause of our errors.

31. Our errors, considered in relation to God, are merely

The first attribute of God that we must attend to is his being
supremely truthful and the giver of all light. So ‘God might
deceive us’ is a flat-out contradiction. And the same holds
for the supposition that he might positively cause the errors
that our experience shows us we are prone to. The •ability
to deceive others may be seen as a sign of intelligence in a
•man, but the •wish to deceive can only come from malice,
or from fear and weakness, so it can’t be a wish that •God
has.

negations; considered in relation to ourselves they are privations.

Although God isn’t a deceiver, we often fall into error. To
understand the origin and cause of our errors, and to guard
against them, we need to realize that they depend not so
much on our intellect as on our will. Also, an error isn’t a
·positive· thing that couldn’t have come into existence unless
God concurred in its doing so. Considered in relation to
God, an error is a mere •negation, ·something that God did
not prevent·, whereas in relation to ourselves, errors are
privations, ·i.e. lacks of something that we ought to have·.

30. It follows that everything that we vividly perceive is true;
and this removes the doubts mentioned earlier.
[Descartes includes under ‘perception’ not only perceiving by the senses
but any kind of propositional thinking.] So the light of nature—our

[•‘Privation’ was a standard technical term. Example: not-being-able-tosee is a mere negation in a turnip, a privation in a blind man. •The root

God-given faculty of knowledge—can’t shine on any object
that isn’t true to the extent that this light reaches it, i.e. to
the extent that it is vividly and clearly perceived. If the faculty
that God gave us was so distorted that it took falsehoods to
be truths ·even when we were using it properly·, God would
merit the label ‘deceiver’! This disposes of the worst of the
doubts ·that I discussed in sections 4–5·, namely the one
arising from the fear that for all we know we might find
something to be utterly obvious and yet be wrong about it.
Indeed, this argument ·from section 29· easily demolishes
all the other reasons for doubt that I have mentioned. earlier.
Mathematical truths should no longer be suspect, because
they’re utterly clear to us. As for our senses: if we notice
anything here that is vivid and clear—whether we’re awake or

sense of ‘concur’ is ‘go along with’ or ‘knowingly not prevent’, but on this
occasion Descartes must mean something stronger than that.]

32. We have only two ways of thinking: •perceiving with the
intellect, and •willing.

The kinds of thinking that we experience within ourselves
can be classified under two general headings: •perception,
or the operation of the intellect, including sensory perception, imagination and pure understanding, and •volition,
including desire, aversion, assertion, denial and doubt.
33. We don’t commit errors except when make judgments
about topics that we haven’t looked into sufficiently.

Now, when we perceive something [see note at top of section 30],
so long as we don’t assert or deny anything about it, we avoid
8

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

error—obviously. And we equally avoid error when we confine
our assertions or denials to what we vividly and clearly
perceive should be asserted or denied. Error occurs only
when we make a judgment about something without having
an accurate perception of it—a common enough event!

1: Human knowledge

author of his actions and deserving of praise for what he
does. We don’t praise automata for moving in exactly the way
they were designed to move, because it’s necessary for them
to do that. We do praise the designer for doing a good job,
because in building the automata he was acting freely, not
out of necessity. By the same principle, when we embrace
something true, that’s much more to our credit if we do it
voluntarily than it would be if we couldn’t help embracing it.

34. Making a judgment requires •will as well as •intellect.
In order to make a judgment we must of course have some
perception, so the intellect has to be involved; but the
judgment itself—the assent—is an act of the will. Now, a sort
of judgment can be made even when there is no complete
and exhaustive perception of whatever-it-is, because we can
assent to many things that we know only in a very obscure
and confused manner.

38. Our falling into error is bad behaviour, not the result of a
bad nature. The faults of subordinates can often be attributed
to their masters, but not when the master is God.
[Throughout this section, ‘a cause’ could instead be ‘the cause’; Latin
doesn’t distinguish them.] Our falling into error is a defect in

how we act, how we use our freedom; it’s not a defect in our
nature. Whether we judge correctly or incorrectly, our nature
remains the same. It’s true that God could have given us
intellects so sharp that we never believed anything false, but
we have no right to demand this of him. When one us men
could but doesn’t prevent some evil, we call him a ‘cause’
of the evil; but that way of talking about humans doesn’t
carry over to God; we mustn’t regard him as a cause of our
errors just because he could have but didn’t bring it about
that we never erred. Men were given power over one another
to use in discouraging one another from evil; but God’s
power over all men is both absolute and totally free. [Those

35. The will has a wider scope than the intellect does, and
that’s why error occurs.

The perception of the intellect extends only to the few things
that come before it, and they are very few. The will, on
the other hand, can be called ‘infinite’ in a certain sense.
That is because we realize that we could will anything that
anyone could will, even God with his immeasurable will. So
we have plenty of scope for •willing where we don’t vividly
•perceive—no wonder we go wrong!
36. Our errors can’t be imputed to God.
It must emphatically not be supposed that God is the author
of our errors because he didn’t give us an omniscient intellect.
It stands to reason that a created intellect is finite, and that
a finite intellect has a limited scope.

last four words gesture towards a view that Descartes expresses openly
elsewhere, namely that God’s actions are free even from the ‘constraint’ of
there being better reasons for him to act in one way rather than in some

37.

other.] So we should thank him warmly for the goods he has
so lavishly bestowed on us, instead of unjustly complaining
that he didn’t give us everything that he could have given us.

The highest perfection of man is that he acts freely
or voluntarily, and that’s what makes him deserve praise or
blame.

It is part of the very nature of the will to have a very broad
scope; and it’s a supreme perfection in man that he acts
voluntarily, i.e. freely; this makes him in a special way the
9

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

1: Human knowledge

nature· that we see it as clearly and comprehend it as fully
as we do anything. When something is as intimately and
securely grasped as that, it would be ridiculous to doubt
it just because we don’t grasp something else—·namely its
relation to God’s powers of knowledge·—that we know must
by its very nature be beyond our comprehension.

39. It’s self-evident that there is free will.
There’s freedom in our will, and we often have the power to
give or withhold our assent at will—that’s so obvious that
it must be regarded as one of the first and most common
notions [see note in section 13] that are innate in us. It showed
up in sections 5–6 where, trying to doubt everything, we went
so far as to entertain the thought of a supremely powerful
creator who was trying to deceive us in every possible way.
Even in the context of that supposition, we sensed within
ourselves a freedom strong enough to enable us to abstain
from believing anything that wasn’t quite certain or fully
examined. And what we saw to be beyond doubt even then
is as self-evident and as transparently clear as anything can
be.

42. Although we don’t want to go wrong, nevertheless we go
wrong by our own will.

Knowing that all our errors depend on the will, you may find
it surprising that we should ever go wrong, because no-one
ever wants to go wrong. But
(1) wanting to go wrong
is one thing, and
(2) choosing to assent to something that is in fact
wrong, though one doesn’t realize it
is quite another. No-one does (1), but (2) happens often
enough with almost everyone. In fact the reason why people fall into error is that they are eager to find the truth
and ignorant of the right way of finding it, which leads to
their passing judgment on things that they don’t properly
understand.

40. It is also certain that everything was preordained by God.
Now that we have come to know God, and to see in him a
power so immeasurable that we think it downright sinful
to suppose that we could ever do anything that God hadn’t
preordained, we can easily get ourselves into a tangle if we
try to reconcile •this divine preordination with •the freedom
of our will, holding both things in our mind at once..

43. We never go wrong when we assent only to things that
we vividly and clearly perceive.

41. How to reconcile the freedom of our will with divine
preordination.

But if we assent only to what we vividly and clearly perceive,
we’ll certainly never take a falsehood to be a truth. Why
‘certainly’? Because God is not a deceiver, so the faculty
of •perception [see note in section 30] he gave us can’t have a
bias towards to falsehood; and that holds for our faculty of
•assent (·i.e. our faculty of judgment ·) too, provided it doesn’t
stray from what we have a bright, open perception of. Even if
there were no proof of this, nature has shaped our minds in
such a way that when we perceive something in that fashion
we spontaneously assent to it and can’t doubt its truth.

But we’ll get out of these difficulties if we bear in mind
that our mind is finite, and that God has infinite power
by which he not only knew from eternity everything that
was or could be going to happen, but also willed it and
preordained it. We can know enough about this power to
perceive vividly and clearly that God has it; but we can’t get
our minds around it well enough see how it leaves men’s
free actions undetermined [here = ‘not settled in advance’]. As for
our own liberty—our ability at a given moment to go this
way or that—we’re so intimately aware of this ·aspect of our
10

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

44. When we assent to something P without having a brightly

1: Human knowledge

perception of it is very vivid; but it isn’t always clear, because
people often get this perception muddled with an obscure
judgment they make about something that they think exists
in the painful spot—something they think resembles the
sensation of pain. But in fact it is the sensation alone that
they perceive vividly. Hence a perception can be vivid without
being clear, but it can’t be clear without being vivid.
47. In order to correct the prejudices [see note in section 1] of

open view of P’s truth, this is a misuse of our ·faculty of·
judgment, even if P happens to be true. Such an assent comes
from our imagining that we had a good enough view of P’s
truth on some previous occasion.

It is also certain that when we assent to something without
perceiving the reason for it, then either •we fall into error or
•we stumble into something true but merely by accident, so
we can’t be sure that we aren’t in error. The light of nature
tells us not to make judgments about things we don’t know,
which is why we don’t often assent to something that we are
aware of not perceiving. What does very often lead us into
error is this: We have a proposition committed to memory
along with the belief that we did once perceive it ·adequately·;
on the strength of that belief we assent to the proposition
now, just as we would if we fully perceived it now; though in
fact we have never perceived it, ·and it is false·.

our early childhood we must consider the simple notions and
what elements in each of them are vivid.

In our childhood the mind was so immersed in the body
that it perceived many things vividly but nothing clearly. Yet
the mind made judgments about many things, and that’s
the origin of the many prejudices that most of us cling to
throughout life. To enable us to get rid of them, I shall
here briefly list all the simple notions that are the basic
components of our thoughts; and in each case I’ll distinguish
the vivid elements from those that are obscure or liable to
lead us into error.

45. What ‘vivid perception’ means, and what ‘clear perception’ means.

[It is time to confront the fact that Descartes’s adjectives

Many people, indeed, never perceive anything accurately
enough to be able to make a judgment about it with certainty. For a perception to support a certain and indubitable
judgment, it needs to be not merely •vivid but also •clear. I
call a perception ‘vivid’ when it is present and accessible to
the attentive mind—just as we say that we see something
vividly when it is present to the eye’s gaze and stimulates it
with a sufficient degree of strength and accessibility. I call
a perception ‘clear’ if, as well as being vivid, it is so sharply
separated from all other perceptions that every part of it is
vivid.

clarus and distinctus
(and their French equivalents
clair and distinct),
translated here by
‘vivid’ and ‘clear’
respectively, are handled differently in every other English translation,
and by all the Descartes scholars who write in English. It has been
assumed by all these that the right translation is
‘clear’ and ‘distinct’

46. The example of pain shows that a perception can be vivid

contexts where distinctus occurs without clarus, it is natural and quite

without being clear, but can’t be clear without being vivid.

usual to translate it as ‘clear’. (2) Descartes’s separate explanations of

For example, when someone feels an intense pain, his

the two words make much better sense with the present translation than

respectively.

The physical similarity of the words favours the usual

translation, but all the adult considerations go against it. (1) In ordinary
English, there’s no clear difference between ‘clear’ and ‘distinct’ (except
in the notion, irrelevant here, of x’s being distinct from y).

11

In many

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

1: Human knowledge

divisibility of component parts and the like. But we also
experience within ourselves certain other items that relate
not to the mind alone or to the body alone, but to the close
and intimate union of our mind with the body (I’ll explain
this later). This list includes: (2) •appetites like hunger
and thirst; •emotions or passions of the mind that don’t
consist of thought alone, such as the emotions of anger, joy,
sadness and love; and •all the sensations, such as those of
pain, pleasure, light, colours, sounds, smells, tastes, heat,
hardness and the other tactile qualities.

with the usual one. •Try for yourself how section 45 reads when you
put ‘clear’ for ‘vivid’. •Repeat the experiment with section 46, and ask
yourself: What sane man could think there is always something very
clear about pain? (3) In sections 47, 68 and 74 Descartes treats clarus
and obscurus as opposites; remember that obscurus means ‘obscure’ in
the sense of dark. The vivid/dark or bright/dark contrast makes better
sense than clear/dark. Quite generally, just as Descartes customarily
writes clarus and distinctus in that order, he customarily writes obscurus
and confusus in that order (section 30 is an exception; see also 4:203).
(4) The meaning of clarus is often—and the meaning of its French cousin
clair is always—something like ‘vivid’. You probably know this already:

49. It isn’t possible to give a similar list of eternal truths,

au clair de la lune means ‘in the bright moonlight’; lumière claire is bright

but we don’t need one.

light.—It doesn’t matter greatly, because except for these three sections

Everything that I listed in section 48 is classified by us either
as (1) a thing or as (2) a quality or mode of a thing. But ·other
items that we perceive fall into neither of those categories·.
When we recognize that
•It is impossible for something to come from nothing,
we don’t classify the proposition Nothing comes from nothing
as (1) a really existing thing, or even as (2) a mode ·or quality·
of a thing, but as (3) an eternal truth that exists ·only· in
our mind. Such truths are called ‘common notions’ [see note
in section 13] or ‘axioms’. Here are some examples:
•It is impossible for a thing to be and not be at the
same time,
•What is done can’t be undone,
•While someone is thinking he can’t not exist,
and there are ever so many more. It would be hard to list
them all; but ·without the help of any such list· we can’t fail
to know them when they come up in our thought, provided
we aren’t blinded by preconceived opinions.

of the Principles Descartes always treats clarus et distinctus as a single
lump, not distinguishing its separate parts. In sections 22 and 25, and
also in 2:1, clare is translated by ‘clearly’ because there is no stylistically
acceptable alternative. Other uses of ‘clear(ly)’ in this version translate
disinctus or some other word, but never clarus.]

48. The items that we can have perceptions of may be regarded either as (1) things or (2) states or properties of things
or as (3) eternal truths. This section lists the things and some
of the properties.
We classify the items we have perceptions of into (1) things,
(2) states or properties of things and (3) eternal truths that

don’t exist outside our thought. . . . I recognize only two basic
classes of things:
(1a) intellectual or thinking things, i.e. ones having to
do with mind or thinking substance;
(1b) material things, i.e. ones having to do with extended substance or body.
We attribute to thinking substance: (1a) perception, volition
and every specific kind of perceiving and of willing. We
attribute to extended substance: (1b) size (i.e. extension
in length, breadth and depth), shape, motion, position,

50. Eternal truths are vividly perceived, but not by everyone
(because of preconceived opinions).
In the case of these common notions, there is no doubt that
12

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

they can be vividly and clearly perceived; otherwise they
wouldn’t merit the title ‘common notions’. Some of them,
actually, don’t merit it as well as the rest do, because not
everyone perceives them as well as they do the rest. It’s not
that one man’s faculty of knowledge extends more widely
than another’s, I think, but just that •the common notions
in question conflict with the preconceived opinions of some
people, making it harder for them to grasp •them. But those
same notions are seen as utterly obvious by people who are
free from such preconceived opinions.

1: Human knowledge

notion that nothingness doesn’t have any attributes, i.e. any
properties or qualities. If we see that we are in the presence
of some attribute, this common notion entitles us to infer
that we are also in the presence of some existing thing or
substance that has the attribute.
53. Each substance has one principal attribute; (1) for •mind
it is the attribute of •thought, (2) for body it is •extension.

A substance can be known through any attribute at all; but
each substance has •one principal property that constitutes
its nature and essence, all its other properties being special
cases of that. (1) The nature of corporeal substance is extension in length, breadth and depth; and any other property a
body has presupposes •extension as merely a special case
of •it. For example, we can’t make sense of shape except
in an extended thing, or of motion except in an extended
space. (2) The nature of thinking substance is thought; and
anything else that is true of a mind is merely a special case of
that, a way of thinking. For example, we can make sense of
imagination, sensation and will only in a thinking thing, But
we can make sense of extension without bringing in shape or
movement, and to make sense of thought without bringing
in imagination, sensation, or the like. Anyone who thinks
hard about these matters will see that this is so.

51. What is meant by ‘substance’—a term that doesn’t apply
in the same sense to God and his creatures.

Regarding the items that we classify as ‘things’ or ‘qualities
of things’, it is worthwhile to examine them one by one. All
we can mean by ‘substance’ is ‘thing that exists in such a
way that it doesn’t depend on anything else for its existence’.
Actually, there’s only one substance that can be understood
to depend on nothing else, namely God. We can see that all
the other substances can exist only with God’s help. So the
term ‘substance’ doesn’t apply in the same sense to God and
to other things—meaning that no clearly intelligible sense of
the term is common to God and to things he has created.
52. (1) The term ‘substance’ applies in the same sense to

54. How we can have vivid and clear notions of •thinking

mind and to body. (2) How a substance itself is known.
(1) As for •corporeal substance and mind (i.e. created
•thinking substance), they can be understood in terms of

substance and of •corporeal substance, and also of •God.

Thus we can easily have two vivid and clear notions or
ideas, one of •created thinking substance and the other of
•corporeal substance, provided we are careful to distinguish
all the attributes of thought from the attributes of extension.
We can also have a vivid and clear idea of •uncreated and
independent thinking substance, i.e. of God. ·There are
two mistakes we must be careful not to make regarding
this·. •We must avoid supposing that our idea adequately

a single common concept, namely this one: things that
don’t depend for their existence on anything except God. (2)
However, we can’t initially become aware of a substance
merely from its being something that exists, because the
mere fact of its existence doesn’t have any effect on us. But
we can easily come to know ·that we are in the presence of· a
substance by one of its attributes. This involves the common
13

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

represents the whole of God’s nature; and •we must confine
our idea to what we clearly perceive to belong to the nature of
a supremely perfect being, not cramming into it any invented
features beyond the ones that really belong there. Do we
really have any idea of God? If you deny that we do, you’ll
have to maintain that there’s absolutely no knowledge of God
in the minds of men.

1: Human knowledge

are speaking correctly we say that God has ‘attributes’ but
not that he has any ‘modes’ or ‘qualities’, because it doesn’t
make sense to suggest that God might alter. . . .
57. Some attributes are in things and others in thought.
What duration and time are.
Some attributes or modes are in the things they are said to be
attributes or modes of, while others are only in our thought.
[Descartes goes on to differentiate duration (which is in the
thing that endures) from time (which is in our thought).
His explanation and illustration of this is unmanageable,
because it runs together three different ideas about ‘time’.
(1) ‘Time’ stands for
•measures of stretches of duration.
It seems correct to say that although the duration of a
running race (for example) is a mode of or fact about the race
itself, the race’s occupying less than four minutes is a fact
about how the race relates to our measuring system, which
is in a straightforward sense ‘in our mind’. (2) ‘Time’ stands
for
•measured stretches of duration.
This is a more plausible account of the meaning of ‘time’,
but it doesn’t imply that time is ‘in our minds’. (3) What
Descartes actually says is that time is ‘the measure of
movement’; this seems to make ‘time’ synonymous with
‘speed’. Somehow, it seems, a curdled mixture of (1) and (3)
lies behind Descartes’s inscrutable illustration: ‘If two bodies
are moving for an hour, one slowly and the other quickly, we
don’t reckon the amount of time to be different in the two,
though the amount of movement may be much greater.’ And
a mixture of (1) and (2) probably explains his saying ‘When we
measure the duration of all things . . . . we call this duration
“time”. Yet this doesn’t add anything to duration, taken in
its general sense, except for a mode of thought.’ The clearly
true thing in this section is the statement that:] we assign

55. How we can also have a clear understanding of duration,
order and number.
[This version of section 55 is rather free, but it expresses Descartes’s line
of thought faithfully enough.] We’ll have a very clear understanding of (1) duration, (2) order and (3) number, provided we

don’t attach any concept of substance to them, i.e. as long
as we don’t think of duration, order and number as things.
When we think about the durations that things have, or their
orders, or their numbers, our thoughts are or should be of
the types:
(1) that iceberg lasted for three months,
(2) the house is between the meadow and the road,
(3) there are three ships this side of the horizon.
This is to treat duration etc. as modes of substances—as
adjectival on the substances, rather than being substances
themselves.
56. What modes, qualities and attributes are.
The term ‘mode’ as used here means exactly the same as
‘attribute’ or ‘quality’, ·but their usage differs, as follows·. We
use ‘mode’ when speaking of a substance as being affected or
altered (·if you boil some water its heat is a mode of it·). We
use ‘quality’ when speaking of facts about a substance that
make it belong to such and such a kind (·water’s fluidity is a
quality of it·). And we use ‘attribute’ when talking in a more
general way about what there is to a substance (·water’s
being extended in space is an attribute of it·). When we
14

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

1: Human knowledge

temporal measures to things and processes by comparing
their duration with the duration of the greatest and most
regular motions that give rise to years and days. [For a straight

other· triangle is moving, that is an accident of it. Hence five
universals are commonly listed: genus, species, differentia,
property and accident. [In this section, Descartes is using ‘property’

translation of this section, by John Cottingham, see page 21.]

(Latin proprium) in a technical sense: a ‘property’ of the Fs, in this sense,
is something that follows rigorously from the definition of F without itself

58. Number and all universals are simply modes of thinking.
In the same way, number, when it is considered simply in
the abstract or in general, and not in any created things, is
merely a mode of thinking; and the same applies to all the
other ‘universals’, as we call them.

being included in the definition. And an ‘accident’ of an F is a feature of
it that it doesn’t share with all Fs.]

60. What real distinctness is.
·My next topic connects with what I have just been talking
about, namely number ·. For there to be a number of things,
the things must be distinct from one another; and distinctness is of three kinds: x may be •really distinct from y, x may
be •modally distinct from y, or there may be a •distinctness of
reason between x and y. [In this context, remember that ‘real’ comes
from Latin res = ‘thing’.] Strictly speaking, it’s only substances
that can be really distinct from one another. If we can vividly
and clearly understand substance x apart from substance y,
that tells us that x is really distinct from y. ·How does it tell
us that?· Well, when we come to know God we become certain
that he can bring about anything that we clearly understand;
so that even if (for example) we don’t yet know for sure that
there exists any extended or corporeal substance, our having
a ·clear· idea of such a substance enables us to be certain
that ·God could create it, and thus that· it could exist. ·And
now for some examples involving real distinctness·.We can
be certain that if matter exists then every single part of a
body that our thought singles out is really distinct from the
other parts of the same substance. ·In case it’s not obvious,
here is the reasoning behind that claim. Given any part x of
any material thing y, we can clearly understand a state of
affairs in which x exists while the rest of y doesn’t; so God
could bring it about that x existed while the rest of y didn’t;
so x is really distinct from all the other parts of y·. Similarly,
just from the fact that I ·clearly· understand myself to be

59. How universals arise. The five common ·kinds of· universals: genus, species, differentia, property, accident.
The whole source of these •universals is this: we use a

single idea for thinking of all individual items that resemble
each other ·in some one respect·, that we can apply a single
word to all the things that are represented by that idea, this
word being a •universal term. When we see two stones, for
example, and direct our attention not to their nature but
merely to the fact that there are two of them, we form the idea
of the number that we call ‘two’; and when we later see two
birds or two trees, and attend not to what they are but only
to there being two of them, we return to that same idea. . . .
Similarly, when we see a figure composed of three lines, we
form an idea of it that we call the idea of triangle, and we go
on to use that as a universal idea with which we represent
all figures composed of three lines, ·treating triangles as a
genus·. Then we notice that some triangles have one right
angle while others don’t, and form the universal idea of
right-angled triangle; since this idea is a special case of the
preceding one, it is called a species. What distinguishes this
species from the rest of the genus is right-angledness, which
is the differentia. Having one side whose square equals the
sum of the squares on the other two sides is a property of
right-angled triangles. Finally, if some right-angled ·or any
15

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

a thinking thing and can have a ·clear · thought of myself
as not involving any other substance, whether thinking or
extended, it is certain that I as a thinking thing am really
distinct from every other thinking substance and from every
corporeal substance. And of course this applies equally to
you and to everyone. We might suppose this:
God has joined some corporeal substance to a thinking substance like you or me, joining them as closely
and tightly as any two things could possibly be joined,
compounding them into a unity.
That could happen, but the soul and the body would still
be really distinct from one another. However closely God
had united them, he couldn’t lay aside his previous power to
separate them, keeping one in existence without the other;
and things that God has the power to separate, or to keep in
existence separately, are really distinct.

1: Human knowledge

can arrive at knowledge of x apart from y, and of y apart
from x, whereas we can’t know either of them apart from the
substance that has them; if a cubic stone is moving, I can
understand the cubic shape without the movement, and the
movement without the shape; but I can’t understand either
that movement or that shape without the substance of the
stone. . . .
62. What distinctness of reason is.
Finally, distinctness of reason ·can be either of two things·.
(1) There is distinctness of reason between a substance and
some attribute of it without which the substance is unintelligible. Consider, for example, •you and your attribute of
•lasting through time. You can’t exist without that attribute
(for you to stop lasting through time is for you to go out of
existence), so there is distinctness of reason between you and
that attribute of yours. Quite generally, we recognize cases of
this kind of distinctness through finding that we can’t form
a vivid and clear idea of the substance if we exclude from it
the attribute in question. (2) There is distinctness of reason
between any two such attributes of a single substance. What
shows us that we are dealing with a distinctness of reason
of this kind is our inability to perceive vividly the idea of one
of the two attributes separated from the other. . . .

61. What modal distinctness is.
There are two kinds of distinctness that could be called
‘modal’. (1) When a given substance has a certain mode ·or
quality or property·, the mode is distinct from the substance—
·for example, you are clever but your cleverness is not the
same thing as you·. It’s a characteristic mark of this kind of
distinctness between x and y that x can exist without y but
y can’t exist without x. ·We can. for example, have a clear
understanding of a state of affairs in which you exist and are
not clever, but we can’t make sense of the supposition that
your cleverness might exist while you don’t·. Thus the shape
and movement of a body are modally distinct from the body
itself; and affirmation and recollection are modally distinct
from the mind. (2) One mode of a given substance is distinct
from the other modes of the same substance. ·For example,
you are clever and good-tempered, and these are two modally
distinct qualities that you have·. It’s a characteristic mark
of this kind of modal distinctness between x and y that we

63. How thought and extension can be clearly recognized as
constituting the nature of mind and of body.

Thought and extension can be regarded as constituting
•the nature of thinking substance and •the nature of
bodily substance;
and then they have to be considered as
•thinking substance itself and •extended substance
itself,
that is, as
•mind and •body.
16

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

1: Human knowledge

as motion is concerned, we’ll do best ·at this stage· to think
of it as mere change of place, without inquiring into the force
that produces the change (though I’ll try to explain this later
in the appropriate place).

This will give us a very vivid and clear understanding of
them. Actually, extended substance and thinking substance
are easier for us to understand than is plain substance with
‘thinking’ or ’extended’ left out. It’s hard for us to grasp
the abstract notion of substance with thought or extension
sifted out from it, precisely because these notions are only
distinct-in-reason from the notion of substance. A concept
isn’t made any clearer by our leaving things out of it; what
makes it clearer ·to us· is our carefully distinguishing what
we include from what we leave out.

66. How sensations, emotions and appetites can be vividly
known, though we’re often wrong in our judgments about
them.

There remain sensations, emotions and appetites,which can
be vividly perceived provided we’re careful to include no more
in our judgments about them than •what is strictly contained
in our perception—i.e. •what we have inner awareness of.
But it’s hard to conform to this rule, at least with sensations,
because ever since our early childhood we have all judged
that our sense-perceptions are of things that •exist outside
our minds and •closely resemble our perceptions. For example: whenever we saw a colour we supposed we were seeing
a thing located outside us and closely resembling the idea of
colour that we were experiencing within us. And because we
had a habit of making such judgments we thought we saw
vividly and clearly—so much so that we took it for something
certain, something that couldn’t be doubted.

64. How thought and extension may also be clearly recognized as modes of a substance.

Thought and extension can also be taken as modes of a substance, because one mind can have many different thoughts,
and one body can be extended in many different ways (e.g.
through changes in shape). [Descartes goes on to insist that
thought be seen as something that is ‘in’ the substantial
mind, rather than being thought of as itself a substance; and
similarly for extension and the substance that has it. Then:]
If we tried to consider thought and extension apart from the
substances in which they inhere—·the substances that have
them·—we would be regarding them as things that subsisted
in their own right, and would thus be confusing the ideas of
a mode and a substance.

67. We often make mistakes, even in our judgments about
pain.

Everything of which we have sensory awareness is subject to
this same kind of mistake—even pleasure and pain! We don’t
suppose that pleasures and pains exist outside us, but we
do think of them as existing not purely in our mind but also
in the hand or foot or in some other part of our body. [In this

65.

How the modes of thought and extension are to be
known.

There are various modes of thought such as understanding,
imagination, memory, volition, and so on; and there are
various modes of extension . . . . such as different shapes,
lay-out of parts and movements of parts. And, just as
with thought and extension themselves, we’ll have our best
understanding of these more detailed modes if we regard
them simply as modes of the things that have them. As far

section ‘pleasure’ translates titillatione, which refers to such pleasures as
that of slaking thirst with cold water, relieving an itch with scratching,
and the like—i.e. to pleasures associated with specific parts of the body.
In section 71, where the topic is pleasure in relation to the body, but not
to specific parts of the body, Descartes uses a different word, voluptas.]

17

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

But our feeling a pain as though it were in our foot doesn’t
make it certain that the pain exists outside our mind and in
the foot, any more than our seeing light as though it were
in the sun makes it certain that the light exists outside us
and in the sun. Both these beliefs are mere carry-overs from
early childhood, as will become obvious below.

1: Human knowledge

and our knowledge of
•the features that must be referred to the senses (as I
have just pointed out)—colours, pain, tastes, smells
and so on.
It’s true that when we see a body, its visible colour does as
much to convince us of its existence as its visible shape;
but we have a much better grasp of what it is for a body to
have a shape than we have of what it is for it to be coloured.
Incidentally, when I write about ‘motion’ I mean movement
from place to place. Philosophers who have fancied that
there are other kinds of motion have merely made the nature
of motion less intelligible to themselves.

68. How to distinguish, in these matters, •what we brightly
and openly know from •what can lead us astray.
In order to distinguish what is vivid ·or brightly lit· in this
context from what is obscure ·= dark·, we must pay special
attention to this: when pain and colour and their like are
regarded merely as sensations or thoughts, they are vividly
and clearly perceived; but when they are considered as real
things existing outside our mind, we haven’t the faintest idea
of what sort of things they are. If someone says ‘I see red in
that cherry’ or ‘I feel pain in my wrist’, all he is saying, really,
is that he sees or feels something there of which he is wholly
ignorant—which amounts to saying that he doesn’t know
what he is seeing or feeling! If he isn’t thinking hard enough,
he may well convince himself that he knows something about
what he sees or feels, because he may think it is something
like the sensation of colour or pain that he experiences within
himself. But if he examines the nature of whatever it is that
the sensation of colour or pain represents as existing in the
cherry or his wrist, he’ll realize that he is wholly ignorant of
it.

70. There are two ways of making judgments about senseperceptible things: one enables us to avoid error, the other
doesn’t.

It is evident that when we say that we perceive colours in
objects, this amounts to saying that we perceive something in
the objects whose nature we don’t know but which produces
in us a certain very obvious and easily recognizable sensation
that we call the sensation of colour. But when we make our
judgment, either of two very different things can be going
on. (1) If we merely judge that there is in the objects (i.e. in
the things, whatever they turn out to be, that our sensations
come from) something whose nature we don’t know, there’s
no error in that. Indeed it’s a shield against error, because
our recognition that we are ignorant of something reduces
the chances of our making any rash judgment about it. (2)
But the scene changes when we suppose that we perceive
colours in the objects. Of course, we don’t really know what it
is that we’re calling a colour; and we can’t make any sense of
the idea of something in the objects resembling our sensation.
But we ride rough-shod over this fact; ·and there’s another
fact that encourages us in our error·: There are plenty of
features—size, shape and number etc.—that actually are or

69. How we know •size, shape etc. is quite different from
how we know •colours, pains etc.

He’ll realize this with special force if he considers the wide
gap between our knowledge of
•the features of bodies that we’re vividly aware of (as I
said earlier)—the size of the bodies we see, their shape,
motion, position, duration, number and so on
18

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

at least could be present in objects in the same way that we
sense or understand them; and we vividly perceive this to
be the case. That makes it easy for us to fall into the error
of judging that so-called ‘colour’ in objects is exactly like
the colour that we’re aware of through our senses, wrongly
thinking we have a brightly open perception of something
that we don’t perceive at all.

1: Human knowledge

mind realized, produced by the objects in question. Moreover,
because it judged everything in terms of its usefulness to
the body in which it was immersed, (2) the mind assessed
the amount of reality in each object by how greatly it was
affected by it. That led it to suppose that there is more
substance—more body—in rocks and metals than in water
or air. . . . Indeed, in a moderate temperature with no wind,
the mind regarded the air as a mere nothing. And because
the light coming from the stars appeared no brighter than
that produced by the meager glow of an oil lamp, (3) the mind
didn’t imagine any star as being any bigger than this. And
because it did not observe that the earth turns on its axis or
that its surface is curved to form a globe, (4) the mind was
apt to suppose that the earth is immobile and its surface flat.
Right from infancy our mind was swamped with a thousand
such prejudices; and in later childhood, forgetting how little
basis there had been for adopting them, it regarded them as
known by the senses or implanted by nature, and accepted
them as utterly true and utterly obvious.

71. The prejudices of childhood are the chief causes of error.
This is the first and main cause of all our errors. In our
infancy, the mind was so closely tied to the body that it
couldn’t make room for any thoughts other than ones involving sensory awareness of what was happening in the body.
It didn’t connect these thoughts to anything outside itself,
but merely felt pain when something was harming the body
and felt pleasure when the body received some benefit. And
when nothing very beneficial or harmful was happening to
the body, the mind had various sensations corresponding to
where and how the body was being stimulated—i.e. it had the
sensations of tastes, smells, sounds, heat, cold, light, colours
and so on, sensations that don’t represent anything located
outside our thought. Also in infancy, the mind perceived
sizes, shapes, motions etc. that were presented to it not as
sensations but as things, or qualities of things, that did or
at least could exist outside thought, though the mind wasn’t
yet aware of the difference between things and sensations.
Background to the next step: The mechanism of the body is
so constructed by nature that it can move in various ways by
its own power, whirling around in its attempts to pursue the
beneficial and avoid the harmful. Now, the mind that was
fixated on the body began to notice that the things it was
trying to get or avoid had an existence outside itself; and (1)
it credited them with having not only •sizes, shapes, motions
etc., which it perceived as things or qualities of things, but
also •tastes, smells etc., the sensations of which were, the

72. The second cause of error is that we can’t forget our
prejudices.

When we are grown up, the mind is no longer a total slave
to the body and doesn’t relate everything to it. Indeed, it
inquires into the truth of things considered in themselves,
and learns that very many of its previous judgments are false.
Yet the mind finds it hard to erase these false judgments
from its memory; and as long as they stay there they can
cause various errors. For example, in our early childhood
we imagined the stars as being very small; astronomical
arguments now clearly show us that they are enormous; but
our prejudice is still so strong that we can’t easily imagine
them differently from how we did as children.

19

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

73. The third cause of error: we find it exhausting to think

1: Human knowledge

words more than with things; with the result that people often assent to words—words they don’t understand—thinking
that •they used to understand them, or that they got them
from someone who did understand them. I can’t go into
this in careful detail here, because I haven’t yet dealt with
the nature of the human body—indeed I haven’t proved that
there are any bodies! Still, what I have said up to here
may be understandable enough to help you to sort out your
concepts into •those that are vivid and clear from •those that
are obscure and confused.

about things that aren’t present to our senses; so our judgments about them are usually based not on •present thinking
but on •preconceived opinions.

Our mind finds it difficult and tiring to stay focussed on
anything, and especially to stay focussed on things that
aren’t present to the senses or even to the imagination. (Why
·this bias in favour of image-bound thinking·? Perhaps it’s
built into the mind as a result of its being joined to the
body. Or perhaps it’s because the mind has had much more
practice in image-bound thinking, because that’s the only
thinking it did in our earliest years.) One upshot of this
is that many people’s understanding of substance is still
limited to what they can imagine or even to what they can
perceive by their senses. They don’t realize that the only
things •imagination gets a grip on are ones have extension,
motion and shape, and that many other things can be tackled
through the •understanding. And they suppose further that
the only independently existing things are bodies, and that
all bodies can be perceived by the senses. ·This means
that they turn their backs on the truth about the world,
because·, as I shall make obvious later on, we don’t perceive
the true nature of anything by the senses alone! That’s why
most people have only confused perceptions throughout their
entire lives.

75. Summary of the rules to be observed in order to philosophize correctly.

If we are to philosophize seriously and search out the truth
about everything that can be known, we must first dislodge
all our prejudices, or at least take care not to trust any of
our old opinions without first re-examining them to check
on their truth. Next, we must focus in an orderly way on
the notions that we have within us, identifying the ones
whose truth we vividly and clearly recognize when we focus
intently on them, and accepting as true those and only
those. By doing this ·we’ll come to be in possession of some
secure truths with which we can start to theorize soundly.
Specifically·, we’ll come to realize (1) that we exist as thinking
beings, (2) that there is a God, and (3) that we depend on
him, and also (4) that by attending to God’s attributes we
can investigate the truth about other things, because God is
their cause. Finally, we’ll see that we have within us, along
with notions of God and of our mind, knowledge of many
eternally true propositions, e.g. (5) that nothing comes from
nothing. We’ll also learn (6) that we have knowledge both
of a corporeal or extended nature that is divisible, movable,
etc. and also of certain sensations such as those of pain,
colours, tastes and so on (though we don’t yet know what
causes them or why). When we contrast all this knowledge

74. The fourth cause of error is that we attach our concepts
to words that don’t precisely correspond to real things.
Language-use has us •tying all our concepts to the words

used to express them, and when we store the concepts in
our memory •storing corresponding words along with them.
Then we find the words easier to recall than the things;
and because of this our concept of a •thing is seldom sharp
enough for us to separate it totally from our concept of •the
words involved. Most peoples’ thoughts are concerned with
20

Principles of Philosophy

René Descartes

with the confused thoughts we had before, we’ll get the habit
of forming vivid and clear concepts of all the things that can
be known. These few instructions seem to me to contain the
most important principles of human knowledge.
76. Divine authority must be put before our own perception;

1: Human knowledge

Straight translation of section 57:

Now some attributes or modes are in the very things of which
they are said to be attributes or modes, while others are only
in our thought. For example, when time is distinguished
from duration taken in the general sense and called the
measure of movement, it is simply a mode of thought. For the
duration which we understand to be involved in movement
is certainly no different from the duration involved in things
which do not move. This is clear from the fact that if there
are two bodies moving for an hour, one slowly and the other
quickly, we do not reckon the amount of time to be greater
in the latter case than the former, even though the amount
of movement may be much greater. But in order to measure
the duration of all things, we compare their duration with
the duration of the greatest and most regular motions which
give rise to years and days, and we call this duration ‘time’.
Yet nothing is thereby added to duration, taken in its general
sense, except for a mode of thought.

but apart from that the philosopher should give his assent
only to what he has perceived.

Above all else we must impress on our memory the overriding
rule that whatever God has revealed to us must be accepted
as more certain than anything else. And although the light
of reason may, with the most shining obviousness, appear
to suggest something different, we must still put our entire
faith in divine authority rather than in our own judgment.
But on matters where divine faith has nothing to say, it is
unworthy of a philosopher to accept anything as true if he
hasn’t ever established its truth by thorough scrutiny; and
he should never rely on the senses—i.e. on the ill-considered
judgments of his childhood—in preference to his mature
powers of reason.

21

