The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza

Oxford Handbooks Online
The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
Martin Lin
The Oxford Handbook of Spinoza
Edited by Michael Della Rocca
Print Publication Date: Oct 2017
Subject: Philosophy, History of Western Philosophy (Post-Classical), Metaphysics
Online Publication Date: Dec 2013 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195335828.013.011

Abstract and Keywords
This chapter investigates Spinoza’s commitment to the Principle of Sufficient Reason (the
PSR) and its role in his system. What sorts of things does Spinoza think require a cause or
explanation? What counts, for him, as a cause or explanation? The PSR is often associated
with doctrines such as necessitarianism, the Principle of the Identity of Indiscernibles,
the Principle of Plenitude, and the existence of God. Some commentators have alleged
that Spinoza’s commitment to the PSR leads him to accept all of these doctrines. This
paper examines each of these doctrines as they pertain to Spinoza’s commitment to the
PSR and his metaphysics more generally.
Keywords: Sufficient Reason, necessitarianism, Identity of Indiscernibles, metaphysics, cause, explanation

Spinoza is a metaphysical rationalist. He believes that everything has an explanation.1 No
aspect of the world is fundamentally unintelligible or incomprehensible. There is nothing
brute. These claims each express what is often called the Principle of Sufficient Reason
(the PSR hereafter). This does not mean that Spinoza thinks that human beings do or
even could possess an explanation of everything. He allows that our cognitive capacities
are limited. Thus there are certain things that we can never know or understand. His
conviction is, rather, that a perfect intellect could (indeed, does) possess such
explanations. This conviction is central to Spinoza’s philosophy and can be seen as one of
the fixed points around which his system revolves.
The PSR has been formulated in different ways by different philosophers: everything has
an explanation, everything has a cause or reason, there are no brute facts, and so forth.
Each of these statements of the PSR harbors ambiguity. For example, the statement of
anything that might be justly called a version of the PSR must be universally quantified—
that is, it must be a claim about everything. After all, only a very committed antirationalist would deny that something has an explanation. But what is in the domain of
the quantifier “everything?” Most—and some would say all—uses of the universal
Page 1 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
quantifier are restricted, at least implicitly. Is Spinoza’s understanding of the PSR
restricted in some way, and if so, to what? Is it restricted to facts, events, substances,
contingent truths, necessary truths—all of these and more?
There is also a question as to what counts as an explanation. Although it is widely agreed
that explanation is one of the principal aims of inquiry, there is little agreement (p. 134) as
to how to analyze explanation. Is something explained when we have an account that
specifies its causes, unifies it with diverse phenomena, subsumes it under law, or
something else? The words that Spinoza most frequently uses to express something like
the concept of explanation are “ratio” and “causa.” To fully understand Spinoza’s
metaphysical rationalism, we need to know how Spinoza understands those terms.
I would also like to investigate the role of the PSR in Spinoza’s system. The PSR is often
thought to entail a number of other significant doctrines. For example, it is often thought
to entail necessitarianism, the Principle of the Identity of Indiscernibles, the necessary
existence of God, and the Principle of Plenitude. Spinoza commits himself to each of these
doctrines but, in some cases, the arguments that he gives for them do not clearly cite the
PSR. Does Spinoza himself see them as connected to metaphysical rationalism? If so,
how?

1. The PSR and the Axioms of the Ethics
The only explicit statement of the PSR in Spinoza’s Ethics occurs in his argument for the
necessary existence of God, given in E1p11d2, where he announces that there must be a
cause or reason for the existence or nonexistence of a thing. If the PSR is one of
Spinoza’s core philosophical commitments, why is it stated only so late in the Ethics? Why
is it absent from the axioms, which presumably describe the fundamental metaphysical
principles as Spinoza understands them? And why does Spinoza only explicitly state it in
arguing for the necessary existence of God? Seen from this perspective, one might
conclude that, although Spinoza believes the PSR and used it in his arguments for the
necessary existence of God, he did not think that any other philosophically interesting
propositions could be established by appealing to it. What is more, it might appear that
the version of the PSR that Spinoza believes is a very restricted one. He says only that the
existence or the nonexistence of a thing requires a cause or reason. Does this mean that
he thinks that only existential claims require explanations? All in all, Spinoza may appear,
at first glance, to subscribe to only a very moderate version of metaphysical rationalism.
The answer to why the PSR is absent from the axioms is that it is, in fact, not absent from
them. Despite appearances, nearly all of the axioms of Part I of the Ethics either express
or serve to clarify Spinoza’s metaphysical rationalism. Thus nearly every aspect of his
philosophy that depends upon the axioms ipso facto depends upon the PSR. This is an
important point because some of Spinoza’s axioms can seem poorly motivated and even
arbitrary. Seen in that light, it is natural to ask, what possible interest could the
systematic working out of the consequences of such a bizarre and counterintuitive set of
axioms hold? But they are not ill-motivated. Rather they directly reflect his metaphysical
Page 2 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
rationalism. If they appear ill motivated, it is only because they are couched in Spinoza’s
somewhat idiosyncratic technical vocabulary, which may obscure their true significance.
This being so, we must first discuss some of the key concepts of Spinoza’s (p. 135)
philosophy: causation, conception, and inherence. These are some of the primitive notions
in terms of which the definitions of Part I of the Ethics are stated and, consequently, they
themselves are never explicitly defined. Nevertheless, we can perhaps recover something
like implicit definitions of them from his uses of them.
Conception and inherence together define the relationship that a substance bears to its
modes. Causation is another important undefined notion in Spinoza’s ethics and, as we
shall see, it is importantly related to both conception and inherence. Let us begin by
considering inherence. According to Spinoza, substances are things that are “in
themselves” whereas modes are “in substances.”2 What does Spinoza mean by “in itself”
and “in a substance?” To begin with, the relation “x is in y” is not one of spatial
containment. For example, modes of thought are in thinking substance but they do not
have a location in space.3 Rather, when Spinoza says that one thing is in another, he
means that one thing inheres in another. Inherence, according to an influential tradition
that originates with Aristotle, is the relation that a predicate or property bears to its
subject.4 It is thus reasonable to assume that Spinoza means that modes inhere in
substance in something like the way that a predicate or property inheres in a subject.
This is confirmed by the fact that he says that modes are affections of substance, which
suggests that they are something like the ways that a substance is.5 Additionally, “modus”
is Latin for way. Modes are the ways that substance is. This further suggests an adjectival
relation between modes and substance.
Spinoza further claims that substances are conceived through themselves and that modes
are conceived through substances.6 Spinoza’s claim is controversial if modes are
properties or qualities of substances. Some might find it more natural to think that
substances are conceived through the properties or qualities that describe them than to
think that properties are conceived through the objects that they describe. For example,
some might find it natural to think that we conceive of Socrates through the attributes
that characterize him: he is short, ugly, wise, and the teacher of Plato.
Spinoza’s reasons for claiming that modes are conceived through the substances in which
they inhere are perhaps easier to appreciate when we understand the way in which
modes can differ from what we would typically call a property. The notion of a mode is
ambiguous in Spinoza. He sometimes speaks of modes as particular or singular things
and sometimes as affections of a substance. Things and affections belong, one might
suppose, to distinct ontological categories. If this is so, then no thing is an affection and
vice versa. The appearance of ambiguity is heightened by the fact that Spinoza often
defines “mode” as God insofar as he is affected by some mode. Such definitions would be
puzzling, to say the least, if “mode” were not ambiguous. Compare this definition to “a
property is a substance insofar as it is affected by some property.” It is hard to make

Page 3 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
sense of such statements without construing the reoccurring word as expressing
different meanings with each occurrence.
(p. 136)

I propose that we disambiguate the notion of a mode as follows. Modes understood as
particular things are substance insofar as it is affected in some way. Modes understood as
properties are the ways in which substance is affected. That is, “mode” has two senses:
(1) God insofar as he is affected in some way and (2) a way in which God is affected.7 It is
clear that these two are distinct. Consider a red rose. There is the rose itself insofar as it
is red and then there is the redness of the rose. The rose insofar as it is red clearly cannot
be identified with redness. The redness is exemplified by a particular but the rose insofar
as it is red is not. The rose insofar as it is red is colored, but the redness is not. Singular
things are God insofar as he is affected in some way. Thus Peter is God insofar as God
Peter-izes, and Paul is God insofar as he Paul-izes. This notion of a mode is familiar. A
dent is, for example, a tin can insofar as its surface is dented. A wrinkle is the carpet
insofar as it is warped. A fist is a hand insofar as it is closed. Modes of God, on this
understanding of the term, stand to God as dents, wrinkles, and fists stand to cans,
carpets, and hands respectively. Thus there is nothing exotic about Spinoza’s conception
of modes. What is innovative is Spinoza’s claim that all ordinary objects are modes of a
single substance.
On this conception of a mode as a substance insofar as it is affected in some way, it is
easier to understand why Spinoza thinks that modes must be conceived through the
substance. Just as a smile, for example, must be conceived through the cat in which it
inheres or a fist must be conceived through the hand in which it inheres, so too must all
modes be conceived through the substance in which they inhere.
With respect to causation, Spinoza claims that substances are self-caused and that modes
are caused by substances. This has several implications for the relationship between
causation, conception, and inherence. First of all, Spinoza believes that causation and
conception are coextensive.8 That is, for all x and all y, x is caused by y just in case x is
conceived through y. What is it for one thing to be conceived through another? Spinoza is
not as forthcoming on this topic as we might wish, but it is clear that he believes that for
all x and all y, x is conceived through y just in case the concept of x involves the concept of
y.9 Of course this raises the question of what it is for one concept to “involve” another.
Spinoza never spells out an answer to this question either, but it appears that if one
concept involves another then it is impossible to possess the first (p. 137) concept without
also possessing the second. Spinoza also thinks that if the concept of x involves the
concept of y then x is understood through y.10 Since, by E1a4, the concept of an effect
involves the concept of its cause, effects are understood through their causes.
Second, Spinoza believes that inherence entails causation so that, for all x and all y, if x
inheres in y, then y causes x.11 That is, a substance is the cause of all of its affections or
modes. By the equivalence of causation and conception, the modes of a substance must
be understood through the substance in which they inhere and which is their cause.

Page 4 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
Now that we have some understanding of Spinoza’s basic vocabulary, let us turn to the
axioms of Part I. E1a1 states, “Whatever is, is in itself or in another.” Because inherence
entails causation, this entails that whatever is, is either self-caused or caused by another.
This also means that whatever is, is understood through itself or understood through
another. What this rules out is that there is something that is not understood or
understandable. This clearly expresses a deep commitment to metaphysical rationalism
and the intelligibility of everything. E1a1 thus states the PSR.
E1a2 states, “Whatever cannot be conceived though another, must be conceived through
itself.” This means that nothing is inconceivable, or, given Spinoza’s understanding of
conception, there is nothing that cannot be understood. By the equivalence of causation
and conception, this also entails that everything has a cause. Nothing is unintelligible or
uncaused. Once again, Spinoza lays his metaphysical rationalist cards on the table.
E1a3 says, “From a determinate cause the effect follows necessarily; and conversely, if
there is no determinate cause, it is impossible for an effect to follow.” That causes
necessitate their effects guarantees that causes provide sufficient reasons or explanations
of their effects. That nothing happens or exists without a cause entails that everything
has a sufficient reason or explanation.
E1a4 and E1a5, which read “The cognition of an effect involves and depends on cognition
of its cause” and “Things that have nothing in common with one another also cannot be
understood through one another, or the concept of the one does not involve the concept
of the other” respectively, do not themselves express Spinoza’s metaphysical rationalism.
However, they play an important role in establishing the relationship between causation,
conception, and understanding, which in turn establishes the entailments from E1a1 and
E1a3 to clear statements of metaphysical rationalism. It is on account of E1a4, which
Spinoza interprets as meaning that the concept of the effect involves the concept of its
cause, that causation is a necessary condition on conception. It is E1a5 that establishes
that conception and understanding are coextensive—that is, x is conceived through y just
in case x is understood through y. E1a4 and E1a5 together entail that causation and
understanding are coextensive, that x causes y just in case y is understood through x.
E1a6 and E1a7, alone among the axioms of Part I, have no discernible relation to
Spinoza’s metaphysical rationalism. E1a6 says, “A true idea must agree with its object.” It
expresses his commitment to a correspondence theory of truth. E1a7 says, “If a thing can
be conceived as not existing, its essence does not involve existence.” This axiom is an
instance of a more general principle that Spinoza clearly believes: if something can be
accurately conceived as not-F, then F-ness does not belong to its essence. This connects
essence to conception, causation, and understanding in ways that have interesting
consequences for Spinoza’s metaphysical rationalism, but it is possible to consistently
believe this principle and deny the PSR. For example, many philosophers today believe
that conceivability entails possibility, but few of them endorse the PSR.
(p. 138)

Page 5 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
So we see, far from arriving late on the scene in E1p11d2, Spinoza’s metaphysical
rationalism is built into the very axiomatic structure of his Ethics. As Spinoza draws out
the logical consequences of these axioms throughout the rest of Part I, he is articulating
the doctrines to which his metaphysical rationalism commits him.12
We are also now in a position to start to answer some of the questions posed in the
beginning of this paper. For example, we asked what is in the domain of the quantifier in
the claim that everything has an explanation? All substances and modes have
explanations. And apart from substances and modes, nothing else exists.13 So the domain
includes substances and modes and nothing else. Does this mean that Spinoza denies the
existence of the other entities often thought to be in the domain of the PSR, such as
truths or events? It is not entirely clear. We can, however, say this much with confidence:
if there are truths or events then they are either modes or substances. At first glance, it
might seem natural to assume that modes and substances must belong to different
ontological categories from truths and events. But, in fact, modes have many
characteristics that facilitate an assimilation of truths and events to them. Consider
truths first. Take some true statement p. It would not be implausible for Spinoza to claim
that p is made true by God insofar as he is such that p. God insofar as he is such that p
might strike some as a bizarre mode, but so long as we allow that being such that p is a
way that God could be, there is no reason to suppose that no such mode exists. If this is
so, then some modes are truthmakers.14 This suggestion is not to be confused with
Curley’s famous claim that, in Spinoza, modes are facts even though, on both of our
interpretations, modes are truthmakers.15 As I have interpreted modes, they are not
abstract and they can exist at specific times and places and so are dissimilar to facts in
these respects.
(p. 139)

We can further appreciate the difference between my interpretation and Curley’s

by noting that, on my interpretation, some modes might be events. Events and Spinozistic
modes have much in common. Both are particulars, both are concrete, and both
correspond to changes in a substance. So for example, a touchdown could be identified
with God insofar as he is affected by a football player who scores a touchdown. A
touchdown is clearly not a fact, so it is not the case, on my interpretation, that modes are
facts.
I do not wish to suggest that Spinoza is committed to any of this, and I certainly do not
mean to suggest that Spinoza carefully considered any of these issues. I merely wish to
claim that if such questions were pressed on Spinoza, he could offer such answers
without contradicting any of the metaphysical commitments that he does explicitly make.

2. The Identity of Indiscernibles
Moving forward from the axioms, we soon encounter a proposition that many have
interpreted as expressing one of the alleged signature consequences of the PSR, the
Principle of the Identity of Indiscernibles (the PII hereafter). In E1p5 of the Ethics,
Spinoza seeks to establish that “[i]n nature there cannot be two or more substances of
Page 6 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
the same nature or attribute.” This clearly bears at least some resemblance to the
doctrine that Leibniz will later name “The Identity of Indiscernibles,” which says that x
and y are numerically distinct just in case they are discernible—that is, different with
respect to some pure intrinsic property. But it is far from clear that E1p5 and the PII say
the same thing. First of all, as Leibniz understands the PII, no two things can be
indiscernible in any qualitative intrinsic respect, not just in respect of attribute or
essence. Second, Leibniz applies the PII to bodies and minds. Spinoza thinks that bodies
and minds are modes, not substances. E1p5 is about substances. So E1p5 does not apply
to bodies and minds. Third, Spinoza thinks that a substance can have more than one
attribute but that no two substances can have the same attribute. This goes well beyond
the Leibnizian doctrine. That doctrine merely states that any two things must differ in
some respect, whereas Spinoza appears to say that any two substances must differ in
every attribute. But these further doctrines that serve to distinguish Leibniz’s PII and
E1p5 are introduced only after E1p5. Indeed, Spinoza argues for some of these later
doctrines by way of E1p5, so the proper interpretation of E1p5 should not presuppose
those doctrines. In any event, in this section, I shall simultaneously attempt to clarify
E1p5’s relationship to the PSR and explore its relationship to the Leibnizian doctrine.
Let us begin by explicating Leibniz’s version of the PII since its connection to the PSR is
explicit. Seeing how the PII is connected to the PSR in Leibniz’s thinking may help us to
see if Spinoza is committed to the PII by virtue of his metaphysical rationalism. As I have
said, Leibniz holds that any two objects differ with respect to their pure intrinsic
properties. Intrinsic properties are properties that are not extrinsic. An extrinsic property
is a property that is possessed only if some non-reflexive relation holds. For (p. 140)
example, being a brother is an extrinsic property because possessing it entails that one is
appropriately related to some other person.
A pure property can be understood in contrast to an impure property. An impure property
is a property the instantiation of which entails the existence of a specific particular. For
example, being fifty miles from Paris is impure since nothing has that property unless
Paris itself exists. That Leibniz does not intend impure properties to be relevant to the
individuation of substances is also clear from his rejection of cases where intrinsically
alike substances differ with respect to their relations and relational properties on the
grounds of the PII. If impure properties were allowed to individuate substances, then
such cases would not violate the PII because the substances in question would differ with
respect to their impure properties.
Not all pure properties are intrinsic, and not all extrinsic properties are impure. For
example, being fifty miles from the capitol of the oldest nation state is both pure and
extrinsic. Being identical to Socrates is both impure and intrinsic.
The restriction to pure intrinsic properties make sense given Leibniz’s main argument for
the PII.16 He says that nothing happens without a sufficient reason (the PSR) and so God
does not create the world without a sufficient reason. If the world contained two
individuals that were identical with respect to all of their pure intrinsic properties (but
Page 7 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
perhaps differing with respect to their extrinsic or impure properties), then God would
have no reason to create the actual world rather than a world in which these two
indiscernible individuals were switched with respect to their extrinsic relations.
Therefore, there are no such indiscernible individuals. That extrinsic properties are
irrelevant to individuation is clear from the fact that relations that one individual bears to
its environment cannot provide the reason why it bears those relations and not the
relations borne by its indiscernible counterpart. For example, if the world contained two
indiscernible twins, Mary-Kate and Ashley, such that Mary-Kate was born first and Ashley
was born second, God must have determined their birth order arbitrarily and so such a
world violates the PSR. That impure properties are irrelevant comes from the fact that
God’s sufficient reason for creating the world is moral: this is the best possible world.
Leibniz’s thought is that impure properties are irrelevant to moral value. For example, if
Mary-Kate and Ashley are alike with respect to all of their pure qualities, it would be
absurd to think that Mary-Kate is virtuous and Ashley is vicious. What could account for
this moral difference? The mere fact that Mary-Kate is Mary-Kate and Ashley is Ashley?
Impure properties, Leibniz quite plausibly claims, are irrelevant to moral evaluation.
Before turning to Spinoza’s argument for E1p5, it is worth noting that if his metaphysical
rationalism leads him, like Leibniz, to the PII, it will be either a very different version of
the principle or for very different reasons. This is because Leibniz’s version of the PII is
distinctive in its restriction to pure intrinsic properties, and the reason for these
restrictions are found in the moral judgments guiding God’s choice. Spinoza’s God does
not make moral judgments and does not choose. Nothing is good or evil from
God’s perspective, and God produces the world out of natural necessity, not choice.17 So
(p. 141)

either Spinoza’s metaphysical rationalism does not motivate a restriction to pure intrinsic
properties or it motivates them very differently than for Leibniz.
The first step in Spinoza’s argument is to establish that things are distinguished from
each other only by a difference in their attributes or in their affections or modes. If two
things are distinguished from each other, Spinoza reasons, they must be distinguished by
some difference. There are only substances and their modes. So only substances and
modes can serve to distinguish anything. Spinoza quickly moves from only substances and
modes can serve to distinguish to only attributes and modes can serve to distinguish. In
making this move, he cites the definition of attribute as what the intellect perceives as
constituting the essence of a substance. So substances can be distinguished only by
essence or by accident.18 He continues by noting that if two substances are distinguished
by attribute then we have no counterexample to the claim that there can be only one
substance of the same nature or attribute. Furthermore, it is not possible that two
substances are distinguished by their modes because substances are conceived through
themselves whereas modes are conceived through the substances in which they inhere.
Spinoza appears to assume that if one substance is distinguished from another by a kind
of feature then that substance must be conceived through that kind of feature.
Presumably, he thinks this because he thinks that one cannot conceive of something if one
cannot distinguish it from other things. So if what distinguishes one thing from another
are features of a certain kind, then it must be at least partially conceived through such
Page 8 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
features. For example, if two things are indistinguishable in all respects other than their
spatial location, then they must be conceived, at least partially, through their spatial
locations. Otherwise, nothing would make a thought determinately about one rather than
the other. Spinoza concludes that, since neither attribute nor mode can distinguish
substances of the same attribute, there cannot be two substances of the same nature or
attribute.
On the face of it, Spinoza’s reasoning is not cogent. As Leibniz—always a perceptive
reader of Spinoza—points out, two substances could share some but not all of their
attributes. Thus they could be distinguished by a difference in attribute although their
attributes overlap. But, as Della Rocca has convincingly argued, Spinoza believes that
each attribute must be, in itself, sufficient for conceiving of a substance. That is to say,
suppose a substance has attributes F and G. Both F and G must be individually sufficient
for conceiving of the substance. But if there were a second substance that was F but not
G, conceiving of a substance as F would not be sufficient for conceiving of either of them.
Thus there can be no two substances that share an attribute.19
We are now in a position to summarize the core of Spinoza’s argument. His begins
by assuming that: (1) if two things are different then they are conceived of differently, and
(p. 142)

(2) things are conceived through their essences. From (2) follows (3) conceiving an
attribute that expresses the essence of a substance is sufficient for conceiving of that
substance. So if there were two substances that shared an attribute, it would follow from
(3) that each substance could be conceived through that attribute. But this would violate
(1). So neither substance could be conceived through that attribute. This contradicts (3).
From this it follows that no two substances share an attribute. None of Spinoza’s
assumptions appear to be closely related to the PSR. They relate instead to his theory of
conception and essence. No doubt this theory has important consequences for the PSR,
especially given Spinoza’s belief that one thing is conceived through another just in case
the one is understood through the other. But those consequences for the PSR are
downstream from the assumptions of E1p5d. They do not feed forward from the PSR to
E1p5d. Thus Spinoza’s version of the PII, unlike Leibniz’s does not derive from the PSR,
at least in the demonstration of E1p5.
Della Rocca has argued that, although the demonstration of E1p5 does not explicitly
depend upon the PSR, it is possible, nonetheless, to discern a connection. He says:
One can see that [Spinoza’s version of the PII] turns on the notion of explaining
non-identity and, as such, one can see its roots in the PSR. Non-identities, by the
PSR, require explanation, and the way to explain non-identity is to appeal to some
difference in properties.
(Della Rocca, Spinoza, p. 47)
Might the PSR lurk behind E1p5 as an unarticulated motivation? It is not entirely
implausible since Spinoza clearly believes that everything has an explanation, and so we
might infer that identities have an explanation. But there is, nonetheless, reason for
Page 9 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
skepticism. As noted earlier, universal quantifiers are rarely (if ever) unrestricted and not
all metaphysical rationalists think that identities require explanation. We have already
seen that, in Leibniz, the PII follows, in part, from the PSR but not because identities
require explanation.20 It is because God’s choice of a world must be motivated and
nothing could motivate God to choose between worlds that were indiscernible with
respect to their qualitative features but discernible with respect to their non-qualitative
features. Indeed, for Leibniz, the sufficient reason for a necessary truth is always an
identity. He never suggests that the identities themselves require an explanation.
What about Spinoza? Might his metaphysical rationalism have drawn him toward
the PII? Let us pause to look more closely at how identities can be explained. The
rationalist proponent of the PII plausibly holds that identities are explained by quality
distributions. How are identities explained by quality distributions? Say that a = b. Why
does a = b? Because (If (for all Fs, a is F just in case b is F) then a = b) and (for all Fs, a is
F just in case b is F). We have explained an identity fact (that a = b) by a quality
distribution fact (that for all F s, a is F just in case B is F). But what explains the quality
distribution? Why is it the case that for all Fs, a is F just in case b is F ? If a = b, then the
only possible explanation of this coincidence of properties seems to be the identity of a
(p. 143)

and b. (Think of how scientists arrive at theoretical identifications. In the laboratory, it is
determined that, for every property tested for, water, for example, is the same as H20.
What could explain this coincidence? That water = H2O!) To put the point slightly
differently, why am I identical to myself? Because I have every property that I have. To
deny this would be a contradiction. But it would be a contradiction only if I am selfidentical. If I were not, then it would not be contradictory for me to have properties that I
lack. But it cannot be the case that identities are explained by quality distributions and
quality distributions are explained by identities. If both were the case, we would have a
vicious explanatory circle. We must choose between explaining the identities by the
quality distributions and explaining the quality distributions by the identities. The PSR
offers us no guidance here.
One consideration that could decide the difference is the ontological priority that one
assigns to objects and qualities.21 If you think that objects are somehow ontologically
prior to qualities then you should prefer the explanations of quality distributions by
identities. On the other hand, if you think that qualities are somehow more basic than
objects (for example, if you are a bundle theorist) then you should prefer explanations of
identities in terms of quality distributions. It would appear, however, that Spinoza thinks
that substance and its attributes are ontologically on par. Substance cannot exist without
its attributes and vice versa. Thus it appears that Spinoza’s commitment to the PSR gives
Spinoza no reason to think that identities must be grounded in quality distributions. But,
in the end, the question is moot because we have already seen that Spinoza has
altogether different reasons for holding his version of the PII that are not derived from
his metaphysical rationalism.

Page 10 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
Before turning to our next topic, I would like to consider briefly the question of the
applicability of the PII to attributes, properties, and relations. Della Rocca has argued
that Spinoza’s commitment to the PII requires him to identify indiscernible properties and
relations.22 What kinds of features could distinguish between two properties or relations?
Perhaps they are distinguished by the second-order properties such as their extensions.
Thus if two properties or relations were coextensive they would be identical. For example,
this would mean that, since Spinoza believes that x causes y just in case x is (p. 144)
conceived through y, he is committed to believing and indeed does believe that causation
just is conception. That is, x causes y and x is conceived through y indicate the same
relation. He thinks that if they were two different relations, there would have to be an
explanation of their nonidentity. The only candidate explanation is a difference in their
extensions. They have the same extensions. So if they were not identical, their
nonidentity would be brute. Nothing is brute. Therefore, they are identical.
It is far from obvious to me that Spinoza would accept this line of reasoning. Spinoza’s
statement of the PII in E1p5 is explicitly in terms of substances, not properties or
relations. But does Spinoza’s reasoning generalize? Intuitively, triangularity and threesidedness are different properties even though they are coextensive. There are, of course,
philosophers who deny this. Might Spinoza be among them? It is unclear, but if he is, it is
not because his metaphysical rationalism obliges him so. As I argued earlier, it is
consistent with the PSR that identities are more basic than quality distributions and
indeed explain those distributions. The same could be true of the identity of properties
and the distribution of second-order properties. Just as basic identity properties are not
obviously repellent to metaphysical rationalism, neither are quiddities, the intrinsic
natures of a properties. Thus Spinoza might believe, consistent with his metaphysical
rationalism, that attributes, properties, and relations are individuated by their quiddities.

3. The Necessary Existence of God
That God exists necessarily is another doctrine that is often thought to be entailed by the
PSR. In this case, Spinoza clearly agrees. In E1p11d2, he both gives the first explicit
statement of the PSR in the Ethics and attempts to deduce the necessary existence of God
from it. Spinoza’s argument is noteworthy because, among other reasons, it is not a
variant of any of the traditional cosmological arguments usually associated with the PSR.
Instead, he attempts to show that the nonexistence of God would be inexplicable and
hence impossible.
In what follows, I propose to look at the details of Spinoza’s argument with an eye toward
specifying the role played by the PSR. I shall argue that the details of Spinoza’s purported
proof illuminate in interesting ways Spinoza’s conception of both causation and
explanation. I shall also spend some time evaluating the cogency of Spinoza’s argument.
By accurately appreciating what does and does not follow from the PSR, we shall acquire
a better understanding of its strength and content.

Page 11 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
Spinoza begins by saying that substances are the kinds of things that are self-caused, by
which he means they have essences that involve existence.23 They are self-caused in that
given their natures, their existence does not call for further (p. 145) explanation. If you
grasp the essence of substance, you cannot reasonably ask why it exists if it exists. So if a
substance did not exist, there would, by the PSR, have to be an explanation of its
nonexistence. But the cause of the nonexistence of God is either internal to God or
external to God. If it is external, then it either shares a nature with God or it does not. If it
shares a nature, then it is God, and so God exists. If it does not share a nature with God,
then it has nothing in common with God so it can neither bring him into existence or
prevent him from existing. So the cause of the nonexistence of God cannot be external. If
it is internal, then God’s nature is contradictory, but it is absurd to say that the nature of
a perfect being is contradictory. So God necessarily exists.
There is much here that deserves comment. Let us start by examining Spinoza’s
understanding of a self-caused being. A self-caused being is one that satisfies the PSR
without having an external cause for its existence. One way that a being might cause
itself is by means of backwards causation or time travel. For example, a man could travel
back in time and bring it about that his parents meet. So he is the cause of his own
existence. This is not what Spinoza has in mind. A self-caused substance does not bring
itself into existence by means of efficient causation. Rather a self-caused substance
explains its own existence because its essence involves existence. This immediately calls
to mind debates about whether existence is a property and so could partially constitute
the essence of something. But Spinoza never claims that existence is a property, and it is
not clear that when he says a self-caused substance has an essence that involves
existence that “involves” means includes or is partially constituted by. Is there another
way of understanding self-causation? Take the example of the empty set. It is not part of
the definition of the empty set that it exists, but anyone who grasps the essence of the
empty set and does not believe that sets are impossible will believe that the empty set
exists. The existence of the empty set will not strike anyone as calling out for explanation.
Its existence is not brute or in any way mysterious. Indeed, if someone asked why the
empty set exists, it would be reasonable to doubt that she had fully grasped the concept
of the empty set. So we see that existence might be metaphysically entailed by
something’s nature even though existence is not a property and is not a constituent of its
essence or real definition. I do not know if Spinoza would view the existence of a
substance as analogous to the existence of the empty set in this way. The letter of the text
is compatible with both accounts.
Consider next, Spinoza’s claim that the nonexistence of something requires a cause or
explanation. This is, of course, just Spinoza’s metaphysical rationalism. The nonexistence
of something cannot be brute. There must be a reason why. Spinoza thinks that there are
just two kinds of explanation for nonexistence. Either the nonexistence is explained by
the thing’s nature or by the action of some external cause. Spinoza gives the example of
the nonexistence of a square circle to illustrate how a thing’s nature could explain its
nonexistence. The nature of a square circle (Spinoza appears to believe that there are
natures of impossible beings) involves a contradiction, and this explains the nonexistence
Page 12 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
of them. The nonexistence of a tiger in my study, on the other hand, is not explained by
the nature of tigers alone but rather by the prior state of the universe (“the (p. 146) order
of nature,” in Spinoza’s vocabulary). That prior state entails the current state, and the
current state includes the nonexistence of a tiger in my study.
Could the nonexistence of God be explained by an external cause? Spinoza believes that if
x causes the nonexistence of Fs, then x has something in common with Fs. He believes
this because he thinks that causes must have something in common with their effects. He
has two reasons to believe that. First, there is the common (although by no means
universal) assumption in the seventeenth century that causation is something like a kind
of property transference.24 In order for the cause to transfer a property to its effect, the
effect must be the kind of thing that can possess such a property. In other words, the
essence of a thing must be compatible with the property. So the cause and the effect must
both have the kind of essence compatible with the possession of the property the transfer
of which is the causation. Spinoza assumes that if both the cause and the effect have the
kind of essence compatible with possession of the transferred property, then they have
the same essence or are modes of the same essence. This assumption is motivated by
further assumptions about the structure of property space. Attributes are determinables
and all modes are determinates of some attribute or are derived from such determinants.
If you want to prevent something from existing, you have to block its causes. Since its
causes share an attribute with it, and blocking is a causal relation, then anything cable of
blocking its causes shares an attribute with it. But since substances are individuated by
their attributes, the only thing that shares an attribute with a substance is itself.25
This line of reasoning is somewhat puzzling. It seems most appropriate to things with
external efficient causes. But the topic under discussion is God’s necessary existence.
God is self-caused—that is, his essence involves existence. As we have noted earlier, it is
not entirely clear how Spinoza understands self-causation, but what is clear is that it is
not a kind of efficient causation by external causes. The story told above appears to be
about external efficient causation. So it is unclear if it is relevant to our issue.
I think the best way to make sense of Spinoza’s remarks is to construe him as
saying that the only way that an external cause could bring about the nonexistence of a
thing is by blocking the causes that produce that thing. But a self-caused being has no
such external causes, so the causes cannot be blocked. Thus no external cause can
prevent something self-caused from existing. But since a self-caused being is such that its
existence is explained by something other than efficient causes, could its nonexistence
also be explained by something external other than efficient causes? Could there be an
explanation of the nonexistence of a self-caused being that cited factors external to the
nature of the thing? Take the case of the empty set. The notion of the empty set is not
incoherent, so if it did not exist, its nonexistence would be explained, presumably, by
something external. What could that be? Surely not an external efficient cause. Still
someone might reasonably believe both that the empty set does not exist and that this
nonexistence has an explanation. For example, it might be explained by the fact that
everything that exists must be concrete. Since the empty set is abstract, it does not exist.
(p. 147)

Page 13 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
The fact that only concrete things exist does not need to share an attribute with the
empty set in order to explain its nonexistence since it is not achieving that via blocking
the empty set’s external efficient causes.
It is difficult even to formulate these questions in terms of Spinoza’s metaphysics. Of
what attribute is God insofar as he is such that the empty set does not exist a mode? Of
what attribute is God insofar as he is such that everything that exists is concrete?
Thought? Extension? Neither of these seem correct. Is this evidence that we have made a
wrong turn? Would Spinoza then see our questions as somehow ill formed? On what
grounds? It is far from clear what justification Spinoza has for his conviction that thought
and extension are the only known attributes. And he himself holds true many statements
that cannot be easily construed as being made true by a mode of either thought or
extension. For example, Spinoza believes that whatever is must be in itself or in another.
Is that made true by a mode of extension? A mode of thought? The problem is not that
Spinoza does not recognize any ontological categories apart from substance and mode.
Rather such difficulties arise from his insistence that all modes are modes of either
extension or thought. In any event, the anti-platonist’s claim that the empty set does not
exist would not need to be explained by something blocking the external causes of the
empty set’s existence. So it is unclear why the factors that explain the nonexistence of the
empty set need to share a nature with the empty set.
Before we turn our attention to Spinoza’s argument for the claim that there can be no
internal cause of God’s nonexistence, we should pause to note that it is also not obvious
that, even granting all of Spinoza’s assumptions about efficient causation, in order to
block God’s existence, an external efficient cause would have to share God’s essence
completely. Partial overlap may suffice. God is by definition a substance with infinitely
many attributes. So to have God’s essence, a substance would have to have infinitely
many attributes. But why could a merely extended substance, for example, not block
God’s existence? After all, there can only be one substance per attribute. So if a merely
extended substance existed, that would, all by itself, preclude the existence of any other
extended substance, including God. Some commentators have argued that Spinoza’s
(p. 148) response to this objection can be discerned in the third and fourth arguments
contained in E1p11.26 Important and interesting issues pertaining to power, infinity, and
reality as Spinoza understands them are raised by these arguments, but consideration of
them would divert us from our topic, the PSR, so I shall set them aside in this paper.
Let us next consider Spinoza’s argument for the conclusion that the nature of God cannot
account for God’s nonexistence. Spinoza’s argument has two main premises. The first is
that God, by definition, is a substance and all substances have essences that involve
existence. In other words, substances are self-caused. So, by definition, if God exists, then
God is self-caused—that is, his existence would call out for no further explanation. The
second is the claim that it is absurd to think that a perfect being has a contradictory
essence. These two premises purport to rule out the two ways that God’s nature could
explain God’s nonexistence. The first way is by lacking the power to explain God’s
existence. The second is by being the sort of nature that cannot be exemplified. But
Page 14 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
defining God as a substance does not guarantee that he has a nature that does not
explain his nonexistence. Something could be defined as self-caused and yet have a
nature that explains its nonexistence without appealing to contradiction. Many things are
impossible despite having coherent essences. Many philosophers doubt the existence of
Platonic forms or Leibnizian monads without alleging incoherence. And if forms or
monads do not exist, it is presumably not contingently so—that is, there is no external
cause for their nonexistence. So Spinoza’s claim that the only internal source of
nonexistence is incoherence is tendentious. If some natures are unexemplified for
internal reasons other than incoherence, then Spinoza must show that God’s nature is not
among them. Indeed, an orthodox Cartesian would regard Spinoza’s God as
metaphysically impossible insofar as Spinoza defines God as a substance with infinitely
many attributes and Descartes thinks that substances cannot have more than one
attribute.27 The nature of Spinoza’s God cannot be exemplified, according to the
Cartesian, not on account of a contradiction contained in his essence. Rather, his nature
cannot be exemplified on account of necessary truth about the category of substance.
What is more, Spinoza has not shown that the nature of God does not contain a
contradiction. He merely asserts that it would be absurd to suppose that a being that is
“absolutely infinite and supremely perfect” has a nature that involves a contradiction.
Something like this is assumed by all ontological arguers prior to Leibniz (who correctly
realized that it is necessary first to show that God is possible) but is far from obvious. For
example, omnipotence is often thought to follow from supreme perfection, but it is not
clear that omnipotence is a coherent concept.28
So we see that the PSR does not entail the necessary existence of God without the aid of a
whole host of highly controversial assumptions. Nevertheless, Spinoza’s use of the PSR in
E1p11d2 allows us to shed some light on one of the questions posed at the outset (p. 149)
of this paper: what is a reason or explanation? Unsurprisingly, we will not get a complete
answer to this question, and Spinoza himself never tackles it directly. But we have seen in
the course of considering Spinoza’s argument for the necessary existence of God from the
PSR that Spinoza thinks that substances can explain their own existences and do so not
by being their own efficient causes but by having natures that involve existence. There is
much that is obscure in this claim, but we can infer that some explanations or reasons are
not efficient causal explanations (of the sort favored by many philosophers today) but
rather take the form of explicating a nature or essence.

4. The Principle of Plentitude
Another important doctrine often associated with the PSR is what Lovejoy calls the
Principle of Plentitude (the PP hereafter). The PP says, in Lovejoy’s words, that “no
genuine potentiality of being can remain unfulfilled, that the extent and abundance of the
creation must be as great as the possibility of existence and commensurate with the
productive capacity of a ‘perfect’ and inexhaustible Source.”29 It is clear that Spinoza
endorses the PP. He writes:
Page 15 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
From the necessity of the divine nature there must follow infinitely many things in
infinitely many modes, (i.e., everything which can fall under an infinite intellect)30
The PP is often thought to be a consequence of the PSR, and some commentators have
thought that Spinoza derives his commitment to the PP from his commitment to the
PSR.31 It is far from clear that the demonstration of E1p16 supports this conclusion,
although I shall argue that it is possible that the PSR plays some background role in
Spinoza’s thinking on the subject.
In the demonstration of this proposition, Spinoza reasons as follows: Properties follow
from the definition or nature of a thing. The more reality the thing defined possesses, the
more properties that follow from it. The divine nature is absolutely infinite. So infinitely
many things follow from it.
The most noteworthy thing about this argument given our present purposes is that there
is no explicit reference to the PSR in Spinoza’s discussion. The only citation in the
demonstration is to E1d6, the definition of God. But prior results are, unsurprisingly,
assumed by the demonstration. For example, that God exists is obviously assumed. Since
Spinoza argues for the existence of God by way of the PSR, to that extent at least, E1p16
assumes the PSR. But many have consistently believed that God exists without (p. 150)
believing the PP. And it is equally coherent to subscribe to the PP while denying the
existence of God. So the existence of God alone leaves us far short of the PP.
Is it possible to discern the influence of the PSR behind any other assumptions or
inferences made in E1p16? It is difficult to say with any confidence. The argument given
in E1p16d is very quick and, indeed, invalid as stated. (That infinitely many things follow
from the divine nature does not entail that every possible thing follows from the divine
nature.) It is tempting to imagine that Spinoza reasoned that if something is absolutely
infinite then it has infinite power. So there is no possible thing that it cannot bring into
existence. If there is a possible thing that does not exist, its nonexistence must have an
explanation. Since God is omnipotent, the explanation cannot be God’s nature. So there
must be an external cause preventing it. But no external cause can limit God. So every
possible thing exists. This assumes, of course, that there are no necessary connections
between modes such that if, for example, mode m exists then mode m1 cannot exist.
I believe that Spinoza would have found the above line of reasoning congenial, but it is
pure speculation to assert that he ever entertained it let alone endorsed it. It remains,
therefore, entirely possible that the PP had no significant connection to the PSR in
Spinoza’s mind.
Before moving on to our next topic, necessitarianism, a couple of remarks on the
connection between the PP and necessitarianism are in order. One might think that the
PP is equivalent to necessitarianism. If there are no unactualized possibilities, then is the
actual world not the only possible world?32 Not necessarily, because, for all the PP says,
there might have been unactualized possibilities. There are, then, possible worlds in
which there are unactualized possibilities and the actual world is not the only possible
Page 16 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
world. In other words, even if the actual world contains every possible thing, there may
well be possible worlds that include fewer things (although not more things). Such worlds
represent ways the world could have been otherwise. Necessitarianism is stronger than
the PP. If necessitarianism is true, then there are no unrealized possibilities, i.e., the PP is
true.33
It might seem odd that Spinoza first tries to prove the weaker claim, the PP, and then
tries to prove the stronger claim, necessitarianism. After all, the PP is not sufficient for
necessitarianism but necessitarianism is sufficient for the PP. But Spinoza’s focus in
E1p16 is not the PP as such. He is much more interested in showing two different claims:
first, that God acts out of natural necessity and second, that a diversity of effects is
consistent with natural necessity. Both of these claims are controversial. A standard view
among Spinoza’s predecessors is that God is a voluntary agent as opposed to a natural
agent. A natural agent is one who acts out of natural necessity—that is, the (p. 151)
actions of a natural agent follow from the essence of the agent. A voluntary agent is one
who deliberates and chooses her actions. So when Spinoza argues in E1p16 that infinitely
many things follow from the nature of God, he is staking out the unorthodox position that
God is a natural agent. It was also commonly assumed by Spinoza’s predecessors that
natural agents produce only one effect by nature. Spinoza argues on the contrary that an
infinite natural agent will have infinitely many natural effects. Both of these claims are
important for Spinoza’s argument for necessitarianism, as we shall see in the next
section.

5. Necessitarianism
Another alleged consequence of metaphysical rationalism is necessitarianism. Indeed,
this alleged consequence is sometimes cited as a refutation of metaphysical rationalism.
But, as always, one philosopher’s modus tollens is another’s modus ponens: Spinoza
believes that rationalism entails necessitarianism and so accepts necessitarianism.
At first glance, it might appear that Spinoza’s argument for necessitarianism doesn’t rely
upon the PSR. He writes:
E1p29: In nature there is nothing contingent, but all things, from the necessity of the
divine nature, have been determined to exist and act [operandum] in a certain way.
Whatever is, is in God (by E1p15); but God cannot be called a contingent thing. For (by
E1p11) he exists necessarily, not contingently. Next, the modes of the divine nature have
also followed from it necessarily and not contingently (by E1p16); and they either follow
from the divine nature insofar as it is considered absolutely (by E1p21) or insofar as it is
considered to be determined to act in a certain way (by E1p28). Further, God is not just
the cause of these modes insofar as they exist (by E1p24c), but also (by E1p26) insofar as
they are considered to be determined to produce an effect. For if they have not been
determined by God, then (by E1p26) it is impossible, not contingent, that they should
determine themselves. Conversely (by E1p27) if they have been determined by God, it is
Page 17 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
not contingent, but impossible, that they should render themselves undetermined. So all
things have been determined from the necessity of the divine nature, not only to exist, but
to exist in a certain way, and to produce effects in a certain way. There is nothing
contingent, q.e.d.
The main idea here is that the nature of a necessary being necessitates or determines
everything. (E1p16) What is necessitated by something necessary is itself necessary. So
everything is necessary.
There is no explicit statement of the PSR in this text, and none of the axioms that express
it are cited. Of course, E1p11, which states that God necessarily exists, depends upon the
PSR, but no one thinks that the mere existence of God entails necessitarianism with no
additional assumptions. But in fact, many of the premises of this argument presuppose
the PSR. Let us start with E1p15, which says that whatever is, is in God. This is because
of the conjunction of E1a1 and 1p14. Recall that E1a1 says that whatever is, is (p. 152)
itself or in another, which I have argued is, given Spinoza’s understanding of inherence,
tantamount to the PSR.
E1p26, which says that effects of the modes follow from the divine nature, also depends
upon the PSR. The idea is that modes produce effects in virtue of their essences. The
essences of things must be conceived through God because, by E1p15, everything is
conceived through God. And we have just seen that Spinoza thinks that E1p15 is partially
a consequence of the PSR.
In short, everything is conceived through or understood through God. This entails that
everything is understood, which is just metaphysical rationalism. But what is understood
through something necessary is, Spinoza concludes, itself necessary. Why Spinoza thinks
so can be seen in two ways. The first is to note that Spinoza appears to think that to
understand something is to possess an explanation of it. A complete explanation of
something specifies its sufficient reason. If something necessary is sufficient for
something else, then this too is necessary. This can be perspicuously framed in terms of
possible worlds. What is necessary exists in every possible world. If it is sufficient for
some x, then it cannot exist without x existing too. So x exists in every possible world, that
is, x is necessary. The second is to note that one thing is understood or conceived through
another just in case it is caused by it. So everything is caused by God. Causes
necessitate.34 God is a necessary being. So everything is necessitated by something
necessary. This entails that everything is necessary for similar reasons. So, appearances
notwithstanding, the PSR plays an indispensable role in Spinoza’s argument for
necessitarianism.

6. Conclusion
More than ever before, recent Spinoza scholarship has emphasized the importance of the
PSR in Spinoza’s thinking. This has trend has been, I believe, salutary and has led to a
deeper understanding of Spinoza on a wide range of topics. It is my hope that this paper
Page 18 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
contributes to this effort in a number of ways. First, I have tried to elucidate the meaning
of the PSR as Spinoza understands it by specifying the range of things to which the PSR
applies and by partially explicating the notion of explanation at work in Spinoza’s
thought. I have also explored the place of the PSR in the axiomatic foundations (p. 153) of
Spinoza’s system as articulated in the Ethics as well as its role in Spinoza’s arguments for
some of his most important doctrines.
In some cases, I have nevertheless, argued for conclusions that go against the current
trend, which tends to depict the PSR as the central idea driving Spinoza’s thinking. For
example, I have argued that Spinoza’s version of the PII as articulated in E1p5 does not
follow from the PSR but rather derives from other, unrelated assumptions. Moreover, I
have argued against the idea that the PII can be straightforwardly applied to anything
other than substances as some influential commentators have assumed. I have also
argued that, in opposition to a well-established interpretative tradition, the importance of
the PSR to Spinoza’s Principle of Plentitude is far from clear.
In short, the picture of Spinoza that emerges from this essay is one of a deeply committed
metaphysical rationalist whose philosophy nevertheless cannot be reduced to simply the
systematic working out of the consequences of the PSR. Spinoza’s thought is more
variegated and multifaceted than that. I do not want to deny, however, that the PSR is a
defining feature of Spinoza’s system. I merely want to emphasize that is not the only one.
Finally, I must admit that the present effort only begins to scrape the surface of the topic
of Spinoza’s metaphysical rationalism. I have left unexplored the role of the PSR in
Spinoza’s philosophy of mind, his physics, his moral psychology, his ethics, and his
political philosophy. Although the PSR is often thought of as a purely metaphysical
doctrine, I believe that it is possible to discern its influence in these other areas of
Spinoza’s thought.35 Consideration of such issues is, unfortunately, beyond the scope of
this paper. There is more work to be done.

Bibliography
Bennett, Jonathan. A Study of Spinoza’s Ethics. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1984.
Biro, John I., and Olli Koistinen, eds. Spinoza: Metaphysical Themes. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2002.
Cover, J. A., and Mark Kulstad, eds. Central Themes in Early Modern Philosophy: Essays
Presented to Jonathan Bennett. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1990.
Curley, Edwin. Spinoza’s Metaphysics. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1969.
Della Rocca, Michael. Spinoza. New York: Routledge Press, 2008.
Della Rocca, Michael. “Spinoza’s Substance Monism.” In Biro and Koistinen eds., Spinoza:
Metaphysical Themes, pp. 11–37.

Page 19 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
Garrett, Don. “Spinoza’s ‘Ontological’ Argument.” Philosophical Review 88 (1979): 198–
223.
Garrett, Don. “Ethics Ip5: Shared Attributes and the Basis of Spinoza’s Monism.” In Cover
and Kulstad, eds., Central Themes in Early Modern Philosophy: Essays Presented to
Jonathan Bennett, pp. 69–108.
Garrett, Don. “Spinoza’s Conatus Argument.” In Biro and Koistinen, eds., Spinoza:
Metaphysical Themes, pp. 127–58.
(p. 154)

Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm. “Primary Truths.” In Philosophical Essays, Trans. by Roger
Ariew and Daniel Garber, Indianapolis: Hackett, 1989.
Lin, Martin. “Spinoza’s Metaphysics of Desire.” Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie 86
(2004): 21–55.
Lin, Martin. “Spinoza’s Arguments for the Existence of God.” Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 75 (2007): 269–97.
Lovejoy, Arthur. The Great Chain of Being. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1957.

Notes:
(1) I am very grateful for helpful comments on drafts of this paper to Michael Della Rocca,
Don Garrett, John Morrison, Tobias Wilsh, and the participants in my graduate seminar at
Rutgers University during the spring semester of 2010.
(2) E1d3, E1d5. Most English translations are taken from C, with occasional
modifications.
(3) E2p1, E2p6.
(4) Categories, 1a20–1b9.
(5) E1d5.
(6) E1d3, E1d5.
(7) It must be noted that Spinoza is not consistent in what he says about modes. He says,
for example, in E1p25c that particular things are affections. But he also says, in E1p28d,
that modes are substance insofar as it is affected in a determinate way. I do not know how
to reconcile these two texts, and I think we must conclude that Spinoza is not as precise
in his use of “mode” as we would have hoped. What I present here is an effort to clean
things up a bit on Spinoza’s behalf.
(8) E1a4, E1p25. Garrett argues that conception implies causation in his “Spinoza’s
Conatus Argument,” p. 136. It is clear that Spinoza also believes that causation implies
conception since he argues in E1p25 that God is the cause of the essences of things
Page 20 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
because otherwise there would be things that are not conceived through God, which
contradicts 1p15.
(9) E1d3.
(10) E1p3d.
(11) This is because, as shown above, inherence implies conception and conception and
causation are coextensive. See Garrett, “Spinoza’s Conatus Argument,” p. 137. See also,
Curley, Spinoza’s Metaphysics, pp. 15–16.
(12) For an alternative reading of the connection between Spinoza’s axioms and the PSR,
see Garrett, “Ethics Ip5,” pp. 101–103.
(13) What about attributes? Although I shall not argue the point here, I do not think that
Spinoza regards attributes as among the things that are. They are, if you like, of the
wrong category to be in the domain of quantification.
(14) The existence of truthmakers does not, without further assumptions, entail the
existence of truths or the reality of the truthmaking relation. (I owe this point to Don
Garrett.) But if we suppose that truths supervene on truthmakers and that supervenient
beings are nothing over and above their bases, then we can easily make the necessary
inference without deforming Spinoza’s basic metaphysics.
(15) Curely, Spinoza’s Metaphysics, pp. 50–74.
(16) Leibniz presents several different arguments for the PII. The one discussed here,
however, is the one characteristic of Leibinz’s late or mature period as articulated, for
example, in his correspondence with Clarke
(17) E1app.
(18) Assuming that since modes are nonessential ways of being a substance they can be
accurately called “accidents.”
(19) Della Rocca, “Spinoza’s Substance Monism.”
(20) One might point to “Primary Truths” as a text in which Leibniz does indeed claim that
identities require an explanation. He writes that “in nature, there cannot be two
individual things that differ in number alone. For it certainly must be possible to explain
why they are different, and that explanation must derive from some difference they
contain” (pp. 31–32). This text says only that nonidentities must have explanations.
Perhaps one might think that if qualitative diversity explains nonidentity then qualitative
sameness explains identity. But this would conflict with the rest of the essay in which
Leibniz maintains that identities are primitive truths—that is to say, truths that do not
rest upon other truths. In any event, the argument is weak, and Leibniz abandons it in
favor of the argument for the PII discussed above.

Page 21 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
(21) I am grateful to Ralf Bader for this suggestion.
(22) Della Rocca, Spinoza, p. 65.
(23) E1d1.
(24) Lin, “Spinoza’s Metaphysics of Desire,” pp. 31–33.
(25) Someone might object that I have needlessly saddled Spinoza with a doctrine that he
never explicitly endorses and that his claim that causes and effects must share an
attribute has an entirely different basis. Here is another line of reasoning that has some
currency with readers of Spinoza. Effects are conceived through their causes—that is, to
have the idea of the effect you must also possess the idea of its cause. Perhaps this is
because the concept of the effect includes the concept of the cause. So you cannot have
the idea of something caused by a mode of some attribute without an idea of that
attribute. This does not, however, entail that causes and effects share an attribute.
Suppose that the cause of some effect e falls under attribute F. So e is conceived through
something that is F. Now, according to Spinoza, things are conceived through the
attributes under which they fall. So if something falls under F, it must be conceived as
such. So in order to conceive of e, we must also conceive of something that is F as F. This
does not, however, entail that e is F. We must add the further assumption that, in order to
conceive a mode of some attribute, it is unnecessary to possess the idea of any other
attribute. Spinoza thinks that each attribute must be conceived through itself and that
conceiving of a mode of an attribute in terms of some other attribute violates that
constraint. I see this as compatible with and to some extent motivated by the theory of
efficient causation discussed above. In any event, as we shall see, understanding
Spinoza’s remarks as resting on this other basis does not clarify much.
(26) Garrett, “Spinoza’s ‘Ontological’ Argument”; Lin, “Spinoza’s Arguments.”
(27) Della Rocca, “Spinoza’s Substance Monism.”
(28) I am thinking of well-known paradoxes indicated by questions such as, “Can God
create a stone so heavy that even he cannot lift it?”
(29) Lovejoy, The Great Chain of Being, p. 52.
(30) E1p16.
(31) The Great Chain of Being, pp. 151–157.
(32) Bennett draws this inference from E1p16 in A Study, p. 122.
(33) Of course, the necessity of the PP would be equivalent to necessitarianism. If every
possibility is necessarily actualized, then there are no possible worlds in which fewer than
all the possibilities are realized. Arguably, Spinoza thinks that E1p16 is an entailment of a
necessary truth (that is, that the more reality a definition expresses, the more things the

Page 22 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

The Principle of Sufficient Reason in Spinoza
intellect infers from it). If this is so, he is committed to the necessity of the PP and thus to
necessitarianism.
(34) It is, of course, common to distinguish causal necessity from absolute necessity.
Causal necessity might appear too weak to entail Spinoza’s conclusion. But those who
think that causal necessity is weaker than absolute necessity typically think that the
causes could be in place but that the effects could fail to follow because some further
condition fails to hold. For example, the laws of nature might be different, but such a
scenario is implausible in the context of E1p29. Because Spinoza presumably thinks that
the laws of nature follow from God’s essence in the same way everything else does, the
laws could not be different unless God had a different nature, which is absurd. The same
would go for any other additional condition.
(35) See Della Rocca’s Spinoza for a bold foray into the connection between these issues
and Spinoza’s metaphysical rationalism.

Martin Lin

Martin Lin is Associate Professor of Philosophy at Rutgers University, New
Brunswick. His research concerns metaphysics and philosophy of mind from a
historical perspective, with particular attention to the seventeenth century.

Page 23 of 23

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University of Toronto Libraries; date: 24 February 2019

